Not in those climes where I have late been straying,
      Though Beauty long hath there been matchless deemed,
      Not in those visions to the heart displaying
      Forms which it sighs but to have only dreamed,
      Hath aught like thee in Truth or Fancy seemed:
      Nor, having seen thee, shall I vainly seek
      To paint those charms which varied as they beamed--
      To such as see thee not my words were weak;
    To those who gaze on thee what language could they speak?

    Ah! may'st thou ever be what now thou art,
      Nor unbeseem the promise of thy Spring--
      As fair in form, as warm yet pure in heart,
      Love's image upon earth without his wing,
      And guileless beyond Hope's imagining!
      And surely she who now so fondly rears
      Thy youth, in thee, thus hourly brightening,
      Beholds the Rainbow of her future years,
    Before whose heavenly hues all Sorrow disappears.

    Young Peri of the West!--'tis well for me
      My years already doubly number thine;
      My loveless eye unmoved may gaze on thee,
      And safely view thy ripening beauties shine;
      Happy, I ne'er shall see them in decline;
      Happier, that, while all younger hearts shall bleed,
      Mine shall escape the doom thine eyes assign
      To those whose admiration shall succeed,
    But mixed with pangs to Love's even loveliest hours decreed.

    Oh! let that eye, which, wild as the Gazelle's,
      Now brightly bold or beautifully shy,
      Wins as it wanders, dazzles where it dwells,
      Glance o'er this page, nor to my verse deny
      That smile for which my breast might vainly sigh
      Could I to thee be ever more than friend:
      This much, dear Maid, accord; nor question why
      To one so young my strain I would commend,
    But bid me with my wreath one matchless Lily blend.

    Such is thy name with this my verse entwined;
      And long as kinder eyes a look shall cast
      On Harold's page, Ianthe's here enshrined
      Shall thus be _first_ beheld, forgotten _last_:
      My days once numbered--should this homage past
      Attract thy fairy fingers near the Lyre
      Of him who hailed thee loveliest, as thou wast--
      Such is the most my Memory may desire;
    Though more than Hope can claim, could Friendship less require?


    Oh, thou! in Hellas deemed of heavenly birth,
      Muse! formed or fabled at the Minstrel's will!
      Since shamed full oft by later lyres on earth,
      Mine dares not call thee from thy sacred Hill:
      Yet there I've wandered by thy vaunted rill;
      Yes! sighed o'er Delphi's long deserted shrine,
      Where, save that feeble fountain, all is still;
      Nor mote my shell awake the weary Nine
    To grace so plain a tale--this lowly lay of mine.


    Whilome in Albion's isle there dwelt a youth,
      Who ne in Virtue's ways did take delight;
      But spent his days in riot most uncouth,
      And vexed with mirth the drowsy ear of Night.
      Ah me! in sooth he was a shameless wight,
      Sore given to revel and ungodly glee;
      Few earthly things found favour in his sight
      Save concubines and carnal companie,
    And flaunting wassailers of high and low degree.


    Childe Harold was he hight:--but whence his name
      And lineage long, it suits me not to say;
      Suffice it, that perchance they were of fame,
      And had been glorious in another day:
      But one sad losel soils a name for ay,
      However mighty in the olden time;
      Nor all that heralds rake from coffined clay,
      Nor florid prose, nor honied lies of rhyme,
    Can blazon evil deeds, or consecrate a crime.


    Childe Harold basked him in the Noontide sun,
      Disporting there like any other fly;
      Nor deemed before his little day was done
      One blast might chill him into misery.
      But long ere scarce a third of his passed by,
      Worse than Adversity the Childe befell;
      He felt the fulness of Satiety:
      Then loathed he in his native land to dwell,
    Which seemed to him more lone than Eremite's sad cell.


    For he through Sin's long labyrinth had run,
      Nor made atonement when he did amiss,
      Had sighed to many though he loved but one,
      And that loved one, alas! could ne'er be his.
      Ah, happy she! to 'scape from him whose kiss
      Had been pollution unto aught so chaste;
      Who soon had left her charms for vulgar bliss,
      And spoiled her goodly lands to gild his waste,
    Nor calm domestic peace had ever deigned to taste.


    And now Childe Harold was sore sick at heart,
      And from his fellow Bacchanals would flee;
      'Tis said, at times the sullen tear would start,
      But Pride congealed the drop within his ee:
      Apart he stalked in joyless reverie,
      And from his native land resolved to go,
      And visit scorching climes beyond the sea;
      With pleasure drugged, he almost longed for woe,
    And e'en for change of scene would seek the shades below.


    The Childe departed from his father's hall:
      It was a vast and venerable pile;
      So old, it seeméd only not to fall,
      Yet strength was pillared in each massy aisle.
      Monastic dome! condemned to uses vile!
      Where Superstition once had made her den
      Now Paphian girls were known to sing and smile;
      And monks might deem their time was come agen,
    If ancient tales say true, nor wrong these holy men.


    Yet oft-times in his maddest mirthful mood
      Strange pangs would flash along Childe Harold's brow,
      As if the Memory of some deadly feud
      Or disappointed passion lurked below:
      But this none knew, nor haply cared to know;
      For his was not that open, artless soul
      That feels relief by bidding sorrow flow,
      Nor sought he friend to counsel or condole,
    Whate'er this grief mote be, which he could not control.


    And none did love him!--though to hall and bower
      He gathered revellers from far and near,
      He knew them flatterers of the festal hour,
      The heartless Parasites of present cheer.
      Yea! none did love him--not his lemans dear--
      But pomp and power alone are Woman's care,
      And where these are light Eros finds a feere;
      Maidens, like moths, are ever caught by glare,
    And Mammon wins his way where Seraphs might despair.


    Childe Harold had a mother--not forgot,
      Though parting from that mother he did shun;
      A sister whom he loved, but saw her not
      Before his weary pilgrimage begun:
      If friends he had, he bade adieu to none.
      Yet deem not thence his breast a breast of steel:
      Ye, who have known what 'tis to dote upon
      A few dear objects, will in sadness feel
    Such partings break the heart they fondly hope to heal.


    His house, his home, his heritage, his lands,
      The laughing dames in whom he did delight,
      Whose large blue eyes, fair locks, and snowy hands,
      Might shake the Saintship of an Anchorite,
      And long had fed his youthful appetite;
      His goblets brimmed with every costly wine,
      And all that mote to luxury invite,
      Without a sigh he left, to cross the brine,
    And traverse Paynim shores, and pass Earth's central line.


    The sails were filled, and fair the light winds blew,
      As glad to waft him from his native home;
      And fast the white rocks faded from his view,
      And soon were lost in circumambient foam:
      And then, it may be, of his wish to roam
      Repented he, but in his bosom slept
      The silent thought, nor from his lips did come
      One word of wail, whilst others sate and wept,
    And to the reckless gales unmanly moaning kept.


    But when the Sun was sinking in the sea
      He seized his harp, which he at times could string,
      And strike, albeit with untaught melody,
      When deemed he no strange ear was listening:
      And now his fingers o'er it he did fling,
      And tuned his farewell in the dim twilight;
      While flew the vessel on her snowy wing,
      And fleeting shores receded from his sight,
    Thus to the elements he poured his last "Good Night."



    "Adieu, adieu! my native shore
      Fades o'er the waters blue;
    The night-winds sigh, the breakers roar,
      And shrieks the wild sea-mew.
    Yon Sun that sets upon the sea
      We follow in his flight;
    Farewell awhile to him and thee,
      My native Land--Good Night!


    "A few short hours and He will rise
      To give the Morrow birth;
    And I shall hail the main and skies,
      But not my mother Earth.
    Deserted is my own good Hall,
      Its hearth is desolate;
    Wild weeds are gathering on the wall;
      My Dog howls at the gate.


    "Come hither, hither, my little page
      Why dost thou weep and wail?
    Or dost thou dread the billows' rage,
      Or tremble at the gale?
    But dash the tear-drop from thine eye;
      Our ship is swift and strong:
    Our fleetest falcon scarce can fly
      More merrily along."


    "Let winds be shrill, let waves roll high,
      I fear not wave nor wind:
    Yet marvel not, Sir Childe, that I
      Am sorrowful in mind;
    For I have from my father gone,
      A mother whom I love,
    And have no friend, save these alone,
      But thee--and One above.


    'My father blessed me fervently,
      Yet did not much complain;
    But sorely will my mother sigh
      Till I come back again.'--
    "Enough, enough, my little lad!
      Such tears become thine eye;
    If I thy guileless bosom had,
      Mine own would not be dry.


    "Come hither, hither, my staunch yeoman,
      Why dost thou look so pale?
    Or dost thou dread a French foeman?
      Or shiver at the gale?"--
    'Deem'st thou I tremble for my life?
      Sir Childe, I'm not so weak;
    But thinking on an absent wife
      Will blanch a faithful cheek.


    'My spouse and boys dwell near thy hall,
      Along the bordering Lake,
    And when they on their father call,
      What answer shall she make?'--
    "Enough, enough, my yeoman good,
      Thy grief let none gainsay;
    But I, who am of lighter mood,
      Will laugh to flee away.


    "For who would trust the seeming sighs
      Of wife or paramour?
    Fresh feeres will dry the bright blue eyes
      We late saw streaming o'er.
    For pleasures past I do not grieve,
      Nor perils gathering near;
    My greatest grief is that I leave
      No thing that claims a tear.


    "And now I'm in the world alone,
      Upon the wide, wide sea:
    But why should I for others groan,
      When none will sigh for me?
    Perchance my Dog will whine in vain,
      Till fed by stranger hands;
    But long ere I come back again,
      He'd tear me where he stands.


    "With thee, my bark, I'll swiftly go
      Athwart the foaming brine;
    Nor care what land thou bear'st me to,
      So not again to mine.
    Welcome, welcome, ye dark-blue waves!
      And when you fail my sight,
    Welcome, ye deserts, and ye caves!
      My native Land--Good Night!"


    On, on the vessel flies, the land is gone,
      And winds are rude in Biscay's sleepless bay.
      Four days are sped, but with the fifth, anon,
      New shores descried make every bosom gay;
      And Cintra's mountain greets them on their way,
      And Tagus dashing onward to the Deep,
      His fabled golden tribute bent to pay;
      And soon on board the Lusian pilots leap,
    And steer 'twixt fertile shores where yet few rustics reap.


    Oh, Christ! it is a goodly sight to see
      What Heaven hath done for this delicious land!
      What fruits of fragrance blush on every tree!
      What goodly prospects o'er the hills expand!
      But man would mar them with an impious hand:
      And when the Almighty lifts his fiercest scourge
      'Gainst those who most transgress his high command,
      With treble vengeance will his hot shafts urge
    Gaul's locust host, and earth from fellest foemen purge


    What beauties doth Lisboa first unfold!
      Her image floating on that noble tide,
      Which poets vainly pave with sands of gold,
      But now whereon a thousand keels did ride
      Of mighty strength, since Albion was allied,
      And to the Lusians did her aid afford:
      A nation swoln with ignorance and pride,
      Who lick yet loathe the hand that waves the sword
    To save them from the wrath of Gaul's unsparing lord.


    But whoso entereth within this town,
      That, sheening far, celestial seems to be,
      Disconsolate will wander up and down,
      'Mid many things unsightly to strange ee;
      For hut and palace show like filthily:
      The dingy denizens are reared in dirt;
      Ne personage of high or mean degree
      Doth care for cleanness of surtout or shirt,
    Though shent with Egypt's plague, unkempt, unwashed, unhurt.


    Poor, paltry slaves! yet born 'midst noblest scenes--
      Why, Nature, waste thy wonders on such men?
      Lo! Cintra's glorious Eden intervenes
      In variegated maze of mount and glen.
      Ah, me! what hand can pencil guide, or pen,
      To follow half on which the eye dilates
      Through views more dazzling unto mortal ken
      Than those whereof such things the Bard relates,
    Who to the awe-struck world unlocked Elysium's gates.


    The horrid crags, by toppling convent crowned,
      The cork-trees hoar that clothe the shaggy steep,
      The mountain-moss by scorching skies imbrowned,
      The sunken glen, whose sunless shrubs must weep,
      The tender azure of the unruffled deep,
      The orange tints that gild the greenest bough,
      The torrents that from cliff to valley leap,
      The vine on high, the willow branch below,
    Mixed in one mighty scene, with varied beauty glow.


    Then slowly climb the many-winding way,
      And frequent turn to linger as you go,
      From loftier rocks new loveliness survey,
      And rest ye at "Our Lady's house of Woe;"
      Where frugal monks their little relics show,
      And sundry legends to the stranger tell:
      Here impious men have punished been, and lo!
      Deep in yon cave Honorius long did dwell,
    In hope to merit Heaven by making earth a Hell.


    And here and there, as up the crags you spring,
      Mark many rude-carved crosses near the path:
      Yet deem not these Devotion's offering--
      These are memorials frail of murderous wrath:
      For wheresoe'er the shrieking victim hath
      Pour'd forth his blood beneath the assassin's knife,
      Some hand erects a cross of mouldering lath;
      And grove and glen with thousand such are rife
    Throughout this purple land, where Law secures not life.


    On sloping mounds, or in the vale beneath,
      Are domes where whilome kings did make repair;
      But now the wild flowers round them only breathe:
      Yet ruined Splendour still is lingering there.
      And yonder towers the Prince's palace fair:
      There thou too, Vathek! England's wealthiest son,
      Once formed thy Paradise, as not aware
      When wanton Wealth her mightiest deeds hath done,
    Meek Peace voluptuous lures was ever wont to shun.


    Here didst thou dwell, here schemes of pleasure plan,
      Beneath yon mountain's ever beauteous brow:
      But now, as if a thing unblest by Man,
      Thy fairy dwelling is as lone as Thou!
      Here giant weeds a passage scarce allow
      To Halls deserted, portals gaping wide:
      Fresh lessons to the thinking bosom, how
      Vain are the pleasaunces on earth supplied;
    Swept into wrecks anon by Time's ungentle tide!


    Behold the hall where chiefs were late convened!
      Oh! dome displeasing unto British eye!
      With diadem hight Foolscap, lo! a Fiend,
      A little Fiend that scoffs incessantly,
      There sits in parchment robe arrayed, and by
      His side is hung a seal and sable scroll,
      Where blazoned glare names known to chivalry,
      And sundry signatures adorn the roll,
    Whereat the Urchin points and laughs with all his soul.


    Convention is the dwarfish demon styled
      That foiled the knights in Marialva's dome:
      Of brains (if brains they had) he them beguiled,
      And turned a nation's shallow joy to gloom.
      Here Folly dashed to earth the victor's plume,
      And Policy regained what arms had lost:
      For chiefs like ours in vain may laurels bloom!
      Woe to the conquering, not the conquered host,
    Since baffled Triumph droops on Lusitania's coast.


    And ever since that martial Synod met,
      Britannia sickens, Cintra! at thy name;
      And folks in office at the mention fret,
      And fain would blush, if blush they could, for shame.
      How will Posterity the deed proclaim!
      Will not our own and fellow-nations sneer,
      To view these champions cheated of their fame,
      By foes in fight o'erthrown, yet victors here,
    Where Scorn her finger points through many a coming year?


    So deemed the Childe, as o'er the mountains he
      Did take his way in solitary guise:
      Sweet was the scene, yet soon he thought to flee,
      More restless than the swallow in the skies:
      Though here awhile he learned to moralise,
      For Meditation fixed at times on him;
      And conscious Reason whispered to despise
      His early youth, misspent in maddest whim;
    But as he gazed on truth his aching eyes grew dim.


    To horse! to horse! he quits, for ever quits
      A scene of peace, though soothing to his soul:
      Again he rouses from his moping fits,
      But seeks not now the harlot and the bowl.
      Onward he flies, nor fixed as yet the goal
      Where he shall rest him on his pilgrimage;
      And o'er him many changing scenes must roll
      Ere toil his thirst for travel can assuage,
    Or he shall calm his breast, or learn experience sage.


    Yet Mafra shall one moment claim delay,
      Where dwelt of yore the Lusians' luckless queen;
      And Church and Court did mingle their array,
      And Mass and revel were alternate seen;
      Lordlings and freres--ill-sorted fry I ween!
      But here the Babylonian Whore hath built
      A dome, where flaunts she in such glorious sheen,
      That men forget the blood which she hath spilt,
    And bow the knee to Pomp that loves to varnish guilt.


    O'er vales that teem with fruits, romantic hills,
      (Oh, that such hills upheld a freeborn race!)
      Whereon to gaze the eye with joyaunce fills,
      Childe Harold wends through many a pleasant place.
      Though sluggards deem it but a foolish chase,
      And marvel men should quit their easy chair,
      The toilsome way, and long, long league to trace,
      Oh! there is sweetness in the mountain air,
    And Life, that bloated Ease can never hope to share.


    More bleak to view the hills at length recede,
      And, less luxuriant, smoother vales extend:
      Immense horizon-bounded plains succeed!
      Far as the eye discerns, withouten end,
      Spain's realms appear whereon her shepherds tend
      Flocks, whose rich fleece right well the trader knows--
      Now must the Pastor's arm his _lambs_ defend:
      For Spain is compassed by unyielding foes,
    And _all_ must shield their _all_, or share Subjection's woes.


    Where Lusitania and her Sister meet,
      Deem ye what bounds the rival realms divide?
      Or ere the jealous Queens of Nations greet,
      Doth Tayo interpose his mighty tide?
      Or dark Sierras rise in craggy pride?
      Or fence of art, like China's vasty wall?--
      Ne barrier wall, ne river deep and wide,
      Ne horrid crags, nor mountains dark and tall,
    Rise like the rocks that part Hispania's land from Gaul:


    But these between a silver streamlet glides,
      And scarce a name distinguisheth the brook,
      Though rival kingdoms press its verdant sides:
      Here leans the idle shepherd on his crook,
      And vacant on the rippling waves doth look,
      That peaceful still 'twixt bitterest foemen flow;
      For proud each peasant as the noblest duke:
      Well doth the Spanish hind the difference know
    'Twixt him and Lusian slave, the lowest of the low.


    But ere the mingling bounds have far been passed,
      Dark Guadiana rolls his power along
      In sullen billows, murmuring and vast,
      So noted ancient roundelays among.
      Whilome upon his banks did legions throng
      Of Moor and Knight, in mailéd splendour drest:
      Here ceased the swift their race, here sunk the strong;
      The Paynim turban and the Christian crest
    Mixed on the bleeding stream, by floating hosts oppressed.


    Oh, lovely Spain! renowned, romantic Land!
      Where is that standard which Pelagio bore,
      When Cava's traitor-sire first called the band
      That dyed thy mountain streams with Gothic gore?
      Where are those bloody Banners which of yore
      Waved o'er thy sons, victorious to the gale,
      And drove at last the spoilers to their shore?
      Red gleamed the Cross, and waned the Crescent pale,
    While Afric's echoes thrilled with Moorish matrons' wail.


    Teems not each ditty with the glorious tale?
      Ah! such, alas! the hero's amplest fate!
      When granite moulders and when records fail,
      A peasant's plaint prolongs his dubious date.
      Pride! bend thine eye from Heaven to thine estate,
      See how the Mighty shrink into a song!
      Can Volume, Pillar, Pile preserve thee great?
      Or must thou trust Tradition's simple tongue,
    When Flattery sleeps with thee, and History does thee wrong?


    Awake, ye Sons of Spain! awake! advance!
      Lo! Chivalry, your ancient Goddess, cries,
      But wields not, as of old, her thirsty lance,
      Nor shakes her crimson plumage in the skies:
      Now on the smoke of blazing bolts she flies,
      And speaks in thunder through yon engine's roar:
      In every peal she calls--"Awake! arise!"
      Say, is her voice more feeble than of yore,
    When her war-song was heard on Andalusia's shore?


    Hark!--heard you not those hoofs of dreadful note?
      Sounds not the clang of conflict on the heath?
      Saw ye not whom the reeking sabre smote,
      Nor saved your brethren ere they sank beneath
      Tyrants and Tyrants' slaves?--the fires of Death,
      The Bale-fires flash on high:--from rock to rock!
      Each volley tells that thousands cease to breathe;
      Death rides upon the sulphury Siroc,
    Red Battle stamps his foot, and Nations feel the shock.


    Lo! where the Giant on the mountain stands,
      His blood-red tresses deepening in the Sun,
      With death-shot glowing in his fiery hands,
      And eye that scorcheth all it glares upon;
      Restless it rolls, now fixed, and now anon
      Flashing afar,--and at his iron feet
      Destruction cowers, to mark what deeds are done;
      For on this morn three potent Nations meet,
    To shed before his Shrine the blood he deems most sweet.


    By Heaven! it is a splendid sight to see
      (For one who hath no friend, no brother there)
      Their rival scarfs of mixed embroidery,
      Their various arms that glitter in the air!
      What gallant War-hounds rouse them from their lair,
      And gnash their fangs, loud yelling for the prey!
      All join the chase, but few the triumph share;
      The Grave shall bear the chiefest prize away,
    And Havoc scarce for joy can number their array.


    Three hosts combine to offer sacrifice;
      Three tongues prefer strange orisons on high;
      Three gaudy standards flout the pale blue skies;
      The shouts are France, Spain, Albion, Victory!
      The Foe, the Victim, and the fond Ally
      That fights for all, but ever fights in vain,
      Are met--as if at home they could not die--
      To feed the crow on Talavera's plain,
    And fertilise the field that each pretends to gain.


    There shall they rot--Ambition's honoured fools!
      Yes, Honour decks the turf that wraps their clay!
      Vain Sophistry! in these behold the tools,
      The broken tools, that Tyrants cast away
      By myriads, when they dare to pave their way
      With human hearts--to what?--a dream alone.
      Can Despots compass aught that hails their sway?
      Or call with truth one span of earth their own,
    Save that wherein at last they crumble bone by bone?


    Oh, Albuera! glorious field of grief!
      As o'er thy plain the Pilgrim pricked his steed,
      Who could foresee thee, in a space so brief,
      A scene where mingling foes should boast and bleed!
      Peace to the perished! may the warrior's meed
      And tears of triumph their reward prolong!
      Till others fall where other chieftains lead
      Thy name shall circle round the gaping throng,
    And shine in worthless lays, the theme of transient song.


    Enough of Battle's minions! let them play
      Their game of lives, and barter breath for fame:
      Fame that will scarce reanimate their clay,
      Though thousands fall to deck some single name.
      In sooth 'twere sad to thwart their noble aim
      Who strike, blest hirelings! for their country's good,
      And die, that living might have proved her shame;
      Perished, perchance, in some domestic feud,
    Or in a narrower sphere wild Rapine's path pursued.


    Full swiftly Harold wends his lonely way
      Where proud Sevilla triumphs unsubdued:
      Yet is she free? the Spoiler's wished-for prey!
      Soon, soon shall Conquest's fiery foot intrude,
      Blackening her lovely domes with traces rude.
      Inevitable hour! 'Gainst fate to strive
      Where Desolation plants her famished brood
      Is vain, or Ilion, Tyre might yet survive,
    And Virtue vanquish all, and Murder cease to thrive


    But all unconscious of the coming doom,
      The feast, the song, the revel here abounds;
      Strange modes of merriment the hours consume,
      Nor bleed these patriots with their country's wounds:
      Nor here War's clarion, but Love's rebeck sounds;
      Here Folly still his votaries inthralls;
      And young-eyed Lewdness walks her midnight rounds:
      Girt with the silent crimes of Capitals,
    Still to the last kind Vice clings to the tott'ring walls.


    Not so the rustic--with his trembling mate
      He lurks, nor casts his heavy eye afar,
      Lest he should view his vineyard desolate,
      Blasted below the dun hot breath of War.
      No more beneath soft Eve's consenting star
      Fandango twirls his jocund castanet:
      Ah, Monarchs! could ye taste the mirth ye mar,
      Not in the toils of Glory would ye fret;
    The hoarse dull drum would sleep, and Man be happy yet!


    How carols now the lusty muleteer?
      Of Love, Romance, Devotion is his lay,
      As whilome he was wont the leagues to cheer,
      His quick bells wildly jingling on the way?
      No! as he speeds, he chants "Vivā el Rey!"
      And checks his song to execrate Godoy,
      The royal wittol Charles, and curse the day
      When first Spain's queen beheld the black-eyed boy,
    And gore-faced Treason sprung from her adulterate joy.


    On yon long level plain, at distance crowned
      With crags, whereon those Moorish turrets rest,
      Wide-scattered hoof-marks dint the wounded ground;
      And, scathed by fire, the greensward's darkened vest
      Tells that the foe was Andalusia's guest:
      Here was the camp, the watch-flame, and the host,
      Here the bold peasant stormed the Dragon's nest;
      Still does he mark it with triumphant boast,
    And points to yonder cliffs, which oft were won and lost.


    And whomsoe'er along the path you meet
      Bears in his cap the badge of crimson hue,
      Which tells you whom to shun and whom to greet:
      Woe to the man that walks in public view
      Without of loyalty this token true:
      Sharp is the knife, and sudden is the stroke;
      And sorely would the Gallic foeman rue,
      If subtle poniards, wrapt beneath the cloke,
    Could blunt the sabre's edge, or clear the cannon's smoke.


    At every turn Morena's dusky height
      Sustains aloft the battery's iron load;
      And, far as mortal eye can compass sight,
      The mountain-howitzer, the broken road,
      The bristling palisade, the fosse o'erflowed,
      The stationed bands, the never-vacant watch,
      The magazine in rocky durance stowed,
      The bolstered steed beneath the shed of thatch,
    The ball-piled pyramid, the ever-blazing match,


    Portend the deeds to come:--but he whose nod
      Has tumbled feebler despots from their sway,
      A moment pauseth ere he lifts the rod;
      A little moment deigneth to delay:
      Soon will his legions sweep through these their way;
      The West must own the Scourger of the world.
      Ah! Spain! how sad will be thy reckoning-day,
      When soars Gaul's Vulture, with his wings unfurled,
    And thou shall view thy sons in crowds to Hades hurled.


    And must they fall? the young, the proud, the brave,
      To swell one bloated Chiefs unwholesome reign?
      No step between submission and a grave?
      The rise of Rapine and the fall of Spain?
      And doth the Power that man adores ordain
      Their doom, nor heed the suppliant's appeal?
      Is all that desperate Valour acts in vain?
      And Counsel sage, and patriotic Zeal--
    The Veteran's skill--Youth's fire--and Manhood's heart of steel?


    Is it for this the Spanish maid, aroused,
      Hangs on the willow her unstrung guitar,
      And, all unsexed, the Anlace hath espoused,
      Sung the loud song, and dared the deed of war?
      And she, whom once the semblance of a scar
      Appalled, an owlet's 'larum chilled with dread,
      Now views the column-scattering bay'net jar,
      The falchion flash, and o'er the yet warm dead
    Stalks with Minerva's step where Mars might quake to tread.


    Ye who shall marvel when you hear her tale,
      Oh! had you known her in her softer hour,
      Marked her black eye that mocks her coal-black veil,
      Heard her light, lively tones in Lady's bower,
      Seen her long locks that foil the painter's power,
      Her fairy form, with more than female grace,
      Scarce would you deem that Saragoza's tower
      Beheld her smile in Danger's Gorgon face,
    Thin the closed ranks, and lead in Glory's fearful chase.


    Her lover sinks--she sheds no ill-timed tear;
      Her Chief is slain--she fills his fatal post;
      Her fellows flee--she checks their base career;
      The Foe retires--she heads the sallying host:
      Who can appease like her a lover's ghost?
      Who can avenge so well a leader's fall?
      What maid retrieve when man's flushed hope is lost?
      Who hang so fiercely on the flying Gaul,
    Foiled by a woman's hand, before a battered wall?


    Yet are Spain's maids no race of Amazons,
      But formed for all the witching arts of love:
      Though thus in arms they emulate her sons,
      And in the horrid phalanx dare to move,
      'Tis but the tender fierceness of the dove,
      Pecking the hand that hovers o'er her mate:
      In softness as in firmness far above
      Remoter females, famed for sickening prate;
    Her mind is nobler sure, her charms perchance as great.


    The seal Love's dimpling finger hath impressed
      Denotes how soft that chin which bears his touch:
      Her lips, whose kisses pout to leave their nest,
      Bid man be valiant ere he merit such:
      Her glance how wildly beautiful! how much
      Hath Phoebus wooed in vain to spoil her cheek,
      Which glows yet smoother from his amorous clutch!
      Who round the North for paler dames would seek?
    How poor their forms appear! how languid, wan, and weak!


    Match me, ye climes! which poets love to laud;
      Match me, ye harems of the land! where now
      I strike my strain, far distant, to applaud
      Beauties that ev'n a cynic must avow;
      Match me those Houries, whom ye scarce allow
      To taste the gale lest Love should ride the wind,
      With Spain's dark-glancing daughters--deign to know,
      There your wise Prophet's Paradise we find,
    His black-eyed maids of Heaven, angelically kind.


    Oh, thou Parnassus! whom I now survey,
      Not in the phrensy of a dreamer's eye,
      Not in the fabled landscape of a lay,
      But soaring snow-clad through thy native sky,
      In the wild pomp of mountain-majesty!
      What marvel if I thus essay to sing?
      The humblest of thy pilgrims passing by
      Would gladly woo thine Echoes with his string,
    Though from thy heights no more one Muse will wave her wing.


    Oft have I dreamed of Thee! whose glorious name
      Who knows not, knows not man's divinest lore:
      And now I view thee--'tis, alas, with shame
      That I in feeblest accents must adore.
      When I recount thy worshippers of yore
      I tremble, and can only bend the knee;
      Nor raise my voice, nor vainly dare to soar,
      But gaze beneath thy cloudy canopy
    In silent joy to think at last I look on Thee!


    Happier in this than mightiest Bards have been,
      Whose Fate to distant homes confined their lot,
      Shall I unmoved behold the hallowed scene,
      Which others rave of, though they know it not?
      Though here no more Apollo haunts his Grot,
      And thou, the Muses' seat, art now their grave,
      Some gentle Spirit still pervades the spot,
      Sighs in the gale, keeps silence in the Cave,
    And glides with glassy foot o'er yon melodious wave.


    Of thee hereafter.--Ev'n amidst my strain
      I turned aside to pay my homage here;
      Forgot the land, the sons, the maids of Spain;
      Her fate, to every freeborn bosom dear;
      And hailed thee, not perchance without a tear.
      Now to my theme--but from thy holy haunt
      Let me some remnant, some memorial bear;
      Yield me one leaf of Daphne's deathless plant,
    Nor let thy votary's hope be deemed an idle vaunt.


    But ne'er didst thou, fair Mount! when Greece was young,
      See round thy giant base a brighter choir,
      Nor e'er did Delphi, when her Priestess sung
      The Pythian hymn with more than mortal fire,
      Behold a train more fitting to inspire
      The song of love, than Andalusia's maids,
      Nurst in the glowing lap of soft Desire:
      Ah! that to these were given such peaceful shades
    As Greece can still bestow, though Glory fly her glades.


    Fair is proud Seville; let her country boast
      Her strength, her wealth, her site of ancient days;
      But Cadiz, rising on the distant coast,
      Calls forth a sweeter, though ignoble praise.
      Ah, Vice! how soft are thy voluptuous ways!
      While boyish blood is mantling, who can 'scape
      The fascination of thy magic gaze?
      A Cherub-Hydra round us dost thou gape,
    And mould to every taste thy dear delusive shape.


    When Paphos fell by Time--accurséd Time!
      The Queen who conquers all must yield to thee--
      The Pleasures fled, but sought as warm a clime;
      And Venus, constant to her native Sea,
      To nought else constant, hither deigned to flee,
      And fixed her shrine within these walls of white:
      Though not to one dome circumscribeth She
      Her worship, but, devoted to her rite,
    A thousand Altars rise, for ever blazing bright.


    From morn till night, from night till startled Morn
      Peeps blushing on the Revel's laughing crew,
      The Song is heard, the rosy Garland worn;
      Devices quaint, and Frolics ever new,
      Tread on each other's kibes. A long adieu
      He bids to sober joy that here sojourns:
      Nought interrupts the riot, though in lieu
      Of true devotion monkish incense burns,
    And Love and Prayer unite, or rule the hour by turns.


    The Sabbath comes, a day of blessed rest:
      What hallows it upon this Christian shore?
      Lo! it is sacred to a solemn Feast:
      Hark! heard you not the forest-monarch's roar?
      Crashing the lance, he snuffs the spouting gore
      Of man and steed, o'erthrown beneath his horn;
      The thronged arena shakes with shouts for more;
      Yells the mad crowd o'er entrails freshly torn,
    Nor shrinks the female eye, nor ev'n affects to mourn.


    The seventh day this--the Jubilee of man!
      London! right well thou know'st the day of prayer:
      Then thy spruce citizen, washed artisan,
      And smug apprentice gulp their weekly air:
      Thy coach of hackney, whiskey, one-horse chair,
      And humblest gig through sundry suburbs whirl,
      To Hampstead, Brentford, Harrow make repair;
      Till the tired jade the wheel forgets to hurl,
    Provoking envious gibe from each pedestrian churl.


    Some o'er thy Thamis row the ribboned fair,
      Others along the safer turnpike fly;
      Some Richmond-hill ascend, some scud to Ware,
      And many to the steep of Highgate hie.
      Ask ye, Boeotian Shades! the reason why?
      'Tis to the worship of the solemn Horn,
      Grasped in the holy hand of Mystery,
      In whose dread name both men and maids are sworn,
    And consecrate the oath with draught, and dance till morn.


    All have their fooleries--not alike are thine,
      Fair Cadiz, rising o'er the dark blue sea!
      Soon as the Matin bell proclaimeth nine,
      Thy Saint-adorers count the Rosary:
      Much is the VIRGIN teased to shrive them free
      (Well do I ween the only virgin there)
      From crimes as numerous as her beadsmen be;
      Then to the crowded circus forth they fare:
    Young, old, high, low, at once the same diversion share.


    The lists are oped, the spacious area cleared,
      Thousands on thousands piled are seated round;
      Long ere the first loud trumpet's note is heard,
      Ne vacant space for lated wight is found:
      Here Dons, Grandees, but chiefly Dames abound,
      Skilled in the ogle of a roguish eye,
      Yet ever well inclined to heal the wound;
      None through their cold disdain are doomed to die,
    As moon-struck bards complain, by Love's sad archery.


    Hushed is the din of tongues--on gallant steeds,
      With milk-white crest, gold spur, and light-poised lance,
      Four cavaliers prepare for venturous deeds,
      And lowly-bending to the lists advance;
      Rich are their scarfs, their chargers featly prance:
      If in the dangerous game they shine to-day,
      The crowd's loud shout and ladies' lovely glance,
      Best prize of better acts! they bear away,
    And all that kings or chiefs e'er gain their toils repay.


    In costly sheen and gaudy cloak arrayed.
      But all afoot, the light-limbed Matadore
      Stands in the centre, eager to invade
      The lord of lowing herds; but not before
      The ground, with cautious tread, is traversed o'er,
      Lest aught unseen should lurk to thwart his speed:
      His arms a dart, he fights aloof, nor more
      Can Man achieve without the friendly steed--
    Alas! too oft condemned for him to bear and bleed.


    Thrice sounds the Clarion; lo! the signal falls,
      The den expands, and Expectation mute
      Gapes round the silent circle's peopled walls.
      Bounds with one lashing spring the mighty brute,
      And, wildly staring, spurns, with sounding foot,
      The sand, nor blindly rushes on his foe:
      Here, there, he points his threatening front, to suit
      His first attack, wide-waving to and fro
    His angry tail; red rolls his eye's dilated glow.


    Sudden he stops--his eye is fixed--away--
      Away, thou heedless boy! prepare the spear:
      Now is thy time, to perish, or display
      The skill that yet may check his mad career!
      With well-timed croupe the nimble coursers veer;
      On foams the Bull, but not unscathed he goes;
      Streams from his flank the crimson torrent clear:
      He flies, he wheels, distracted with his throes;
    Dart follows dart--lance, lance--loud bellowings speak his woes.


    Again he comes; nor dart nor lance avail,
      Nor the wild plunging of the tortured horse;
      Though Man and Man's avenging arms assail,
      Vain are his weapons, vainer is his force.
      One gallant steed is stretched a mangled corse;
      Another, hideous sight! unseamed appears,
      His gory chest unveils life's panting source;
      Though death-struck, still his feeble frame he rears;
    Staggering, but stemming all, his Lord unharmed he bears.


    Foiled, bleeding, breathless, furious to the last,
      Full in the centre stands the Bull at bay,
      Mid wounds, and clinging darts, and lances brast,
      And foes disabled in the brutal fray:
      And now the Matadores around him play,
      Shake the red cloak, and poise the ready brand:
      Once more through all he bursts his thundering way--
      Vain rage! the mantle quits the conynge hand,
    Wraps his fierce eye--'tis past--he sinks upon the sand!


    Where his vast neck just mingles with the spine,
      Sheathed in his form the deadly weapon lies.
      He stops--he starts--disdaining to decline:
      Slowly he falls, amidst triumphant cries,
      Without a groan, without a struggle dies.
      The decorated car appears--on high
      The corse is piled--sweet sight for vulgar eyes--
      Four steeds that spurn the rein, as swift as shy,
    Hurl the dark bulk along, scarce seen in dashing by.


    Such the ungentle sport that oft invites
      The Spanish maid, and cheers the Spanish swain.
      Nurtured in blood betimes, his heart delights
      In vengeance, gloating on another's pain.
      What private feuds the troubled village stain!
      Though now one phalanxed host should meet the foe,
      Enough, alas! in humble homes remain,
      To meditate 'gainst friend the secret blow,
   For some slight cause of wrath, whence Life's warm stream must flow.


    But Jealousy has fled: his bars, his bolts,
      His withered Centinel, Duenna sage!
      And all whereat the generous soul revolts,
      Which the stern dotard deemed he could encage,
      Have passed to darkness with the vanished age.
      Who late so free as Spanish girls were seen,
      (Ere War uprose in his volcanic rage,)
      With braided tresses bounding o'er the green,
    While on the gay dance shone Night's lover-loving Queen?


    Oh! many a time and oft, had Harold loved,
      Or dreamed he loved, since Rapture is a dream;
      But now his wayward bosom was unmoved,
      For not yet had he drunk of Lethe's stream;
      And lately had he learned with truth to deem
      Love has no gift so grateful as his wings:
      How fair, how young, how soft soe'er he seem,
      Full from the fount of Joy's delicious springs
    Some bitter o'er the flowers its bubbling venom flings.


    Yet to the beauteous form he was not blind,
      Though now it moved him as it moves the wise;
      Not that Philosophy on such a mind
      E'er deigned to bend her chastely-awful eyes:
      But Passion raves herself to rest, or flies;
      And Vice, that digs her own voluptuous tomb,
      Had buried long his hopes, no more to rise:
      Pleasure's palled Victim! life-abhorring Gloom
    Wrote on his faded brow curst Cain's unresting doom.


    Still he beheld, nor mingled with the throng;
      But viewed them not with misanthropic hate:
      Fain would he now have joined the dance, the song;
      But who may smile that sinks beneath his fate?
      Nought that he saw his sadness could abate:
      Yet once he struggled 'gainst the Demon's sway,
      And as in Beauty's bower he pensive sate,
      Poured forth his unpremeditated lay,
    To charms as fair as those that soothed his happier day.



    Nay, smile not at my sullen brow;
      Alas! I cannot smile again:
    Yet Heaven avert that ever thou
      Shouldst weep, and haply weep in vain.

    And dost thou ask what secret woe
      I bear, corroding Joy and Youth?
    And wilt thou vainly seek to know
      A pang, ev'n thou must fail to soothe?

    It is not love, it is not hate,
      Nor low Ambition's honours lost,
    That bids me loathe my present state,
      And fly from all I prized the most:

    It is that weariness which springs
      From all I meet, or hear, or see:
    To me no pleasure Beauty brings;
      Thine eyes have scarce a charm for me.

    It is that settled, ceaseless gloom
      The fabled Hebrew Wanderer bore;
    That will not look beyond the tomb,
      But cannot hope for rest before.

    What Exile from himself can flee?
      To zones though more and more remote,
    Still, still pursues, where'er I be,
      The blight of Life--the Demon Thought.

    Yet others rapt in pleasure seem,
      And taste of all that I forsake;
    Oh! may they still of transport dream,
      And ne'er--at least like me--awake!

    Through many a clime 'tis mine to go,
      With many a retrospection curst;
    And all my solace is to know,
      Whate'er betides, I've known the worst.

    What is that worst? Nay do not ask--
      In pity from the search forbear:
    Smile on--nor venture to unmask
      Man's heart, and view the Hell that's there.

    Adieu, fair Cadiz! yea, a long adieu!
      Who may forget how well thy walls have stood?
      When all were changing thou alone wert true,
      First to be free and last to be subdued;
      And if amidst a scene, a shock so rude,
      Some native blood was seen thy streets to dye,
      A Traitor only fell beneath the feud:
      Here all were noble, save Nobility;
    None hugged a Conqueror's chain, save fallen Chivalry!


    Such be the sons of Spain, and strange her Fate!
      They fight for Freedom who were never free,
      A Kingless people for a nerveless state;
      Her vassals combat when their Chieftains flee,
      True to the veriest slaves of Treachery:
      Fond of a land which gave them nought but life,
      Pride points the path that leads to Liberty;
      Back to the struggle, baffled in the strife,
    War, war is still the cry, "War even to the knife!"


    Ye, who would more of Spain and Spaniards know
      Go, read whate'er is writ of bloodiest strife:
      Whate'er keen Vengeance urged on foreign foe
      Can act, is acting there against man's life:
      From flashing scimitar to secret knife,
      War mouldeth there each weapon to his need--
      So may he guard the sister and the wife,
      So may he make each curst oppressor bleed--
    So may such foes deserve the most remorseless deed!


    Flows there a tear of Pity for the dead?
      Look o'er the ravage of the reeking plain;
      Look on the hands with female slaughter red;
      Then to the dogs resign the unburied slain,
      Then to the vulture let each corse remain,
      Albeit unworthy of the prey-bird's maw;
      Let their bleached bones, and blood's unbleaching stain,
      Long mark the battle-field with hideous awe:
    Thus only may our sons conceive the scenes we saw!


    Nor yet, alas! the dreadful work is done;
      Fresh legions pour adown the Pyrenees:
      It deepens still, the work is scarce begun,
      Nor mortal eye the distant end foresees.
      Fall'n nations gaze on Spain; if freed, she frees
      More than her fell Pizarros once enchained:
      Strange retribution! now Columbia's ease
      Repairs the wrongs that Quito's sons sustained,
    While o'er the parent clime prowls Murder unrestrained.


    Not all the blood at Talavera shed,
      Not all the marvels of Barossa's fight,
      Not Albuera lavish of the dead,
      Have won for Spain her well asserted right.
      When shall her Olive-Branch be free from blight?
      When shall she breathe her from the blushing toil?
      How many a doubtful day shall sink in night,
      Ere the Frank robber turn him from his spoil,
    And Freedom's stranger-tree grow native of the soil!


    And thou, my friend!--since unavailing woe
      Bursts from my heart, and mingles with the strain--
     Had the sword laid thee with the mighty low,
      Pride might forbid e'en Friendship to complain:
      But thus unlaurelled to descend in vain,
      By all forgotten, save the lonely breast,
      And mix unbleeding with the boasted slain,
      While Glory crowns so many a meaner crest!
    What hadst thou done to sink so peacefully to rest?


    Oh, known the earliest, and esteemed the most!
      Dear to a heart where nought was left so dear!
      Though to my hopeless days for ever lost,
      In dreams deny me not to see thee here!
      And Morn in secret shall renew the tear
      Of Consciousness awaking to her woes,
      And Fancy hover o'er thy bloodless bier,
      Till my frail frame return to whence it rose,
    And mourned and mourner lie united in repose.


    Here is one fytte of Harold's pilgrimage:
      Ye who of him may further seek to know,
      Shall find some tidings in a future page,
      If he that rhymeth now may scribble moe.
      Is this too much? stern Critic! say not so:
      Patience! and ye shall hear what he beheld
      In other lands, where he was doomed to go:
      Lands that contain the monuments of Eld,
    Ere Greece and Grecian arts by barbarous hands were quelled.




Come, blue-eyed Maid of Heaven!--but Thou, alas!
      Didst never yet one mortal song inspire--
      Goddess of Wisdom! here thy temple was,
      And is, despite of War and wasting fire,
      And years, that bade thy worship to expire:
      But worse than steel, and flame, and ages slow,
      Is the dread sceptre and dominion dire
      Of men who never felt the sacred glow
    That thoughts of thee and thine on polished breasts bestow.


    Ancient of days! august Athena! where,
      Where are thy men of might? thy grand in soul?
      Gone--glimmering through the dream of things that were:
      First in the race that led to Glory's goal,
      They won, and passed away--is this the whole?
      A schoolboy's tale, the wonder of an hour!
      The Warrior's weapon and the Sophist's stole
      Are sought in vain, and o'er each mouldering tower,
    Dim with the mist of years, gray flits the shade of power.


    Son of the Morning, rise! approach you here!
      Come--but molest not yon defenceless Urn:
      Look on this spot--a Nation's sepulchre!
      Abode of Gods, whose shrines no longer burn.
      Even Gods must yield--Religions take their turn:
      'Twas Jove's--'tis Mahomet's--and other Creeds
      Will rise with other years, till Man shall learn
      Vainly his incense soars, his victim bleeds;
    Poor child of Doubt and Death, whose hope is built on reeds.


    Bound to the Earth, he lifts his eye to Heaven--
      Is't not enough, Unhappy Thing! to know
      Thou art? Is this a boon so kindly given,
      That being, thou would'st be again, and go,
      Thou know'st not, reck'st not to what region, so
      On Earth no more, but mingled with the skies?
      Still wilt thou dream on future Joy and Woe?
      Regard and weigh yon dust before it flies:
    That little urn saith more than thousand Homilies.


    Or burst the vanished Hero's lofty mound;
      Far on the solitary shore he sleeps:
      He fell, and falling nations mourned around;
      But now not one of saddening thousands weeps,
      Nor warlike worshipper his vigil keeps
      Where demi-gods appeared, as records tell.
      Remove yon skull from out the scattered heaps:
      Is that a Temple where a God may dwell?
    Why ev'n the Worm at last disdains her shattered cell!


    Look on its broken arch, its ruined wall,
      Its chambers desolate, and portals foul:
      Yes, this was once Ambition's airy hall,
      The Dome of Thought, the Palace of the Soul:
      Behold through each lack-lustre, eyeless hole,
      The gay recess of Wisdom and of Wit
      And Passion's host, that never brooked control:
      Can all Saint, Sage, or Sophist ever writ,
    People this lonely tower, this tenement refit?


    Well didst thou speak, Athena's wisest son!
      "All that we know is, nothing can be known."
      Why should we shrink from what we cannot shun?
      Each hath its pang, but feeble sufferers groan
      With brain-born dreams of Evil all their own.
      Pursue what Chance or Fate proclaimeth best;
      Peace waits us on the shores of Acheron:
      There no forced banquet claims the sated guest,
    But Silence spreads the couch of ever welcome Rest.


    Yet if, as holiest men have deemed, there be
      A land of Souls beyond that sable shore,
      To shame the Doctrine of the Sadducee
      And Sophists, madly vain of dubious lore;
      How sweet it were in concert to adore
      With those who made our mortal labours light!
      To hear each voice we feared to hear no more!
      Behold each mighty shade revealed to sight,
    The Bactrian, Samian sage, and all who taught the Right!


    There, Thou!--whose Love and Life together fled,
      Have left me here to love and live in vain--
      Twined with my heart, and can I deem thee dead
      When busy Memory flashes on my brain?
      Well--I will dream that we may meet again,
      And woo the vision to my vacant breast:
      If aught of young Remembrance then remain,
      Be as it may Futurity's behest,
    For me 'twere bliss enough to know thy spirit blest!


    Here let me sit upon this massy stone,
      The marble column's yet unshaken base;
      Here, son of Saturn! was thy favourite throne:
      Mightiest of many such! Hence let me trace
      The latent grandeur of thy dwelling-place.
      It may not be: nor ev'n can Fancy's eye
      Restore what Time hath laboured to deface.
      Yet these proud Pillars claim no passing sigh;
    Unmoved the Moslem sits, the light Greek carols by.


    But who, of all the plunderers of yon Fane
      On high--where Pallas linger'd, loth to flee
      The latest relic of her ancient reign--
      The last, the worst, dull spoiler, who was he?
      Blush, Caledonia! such thy son could be!
      England! I joy no child he was of thine:
      Thy free-born men should spare what once was free;
      Yet they could violate each saddening shrine,
    And hear these altars o'er the long-reluctant brine.


    But most the modern Pict's ignoble boast,
      To rive what Goth, and Turk, and Time hath spared:
      Cold as the crags upon his native coast,
      His mind as barren and his heart as hard,
      Is he whose head conceived, whose hand prepared.
      Aught to displace Athenæ's poor remains:
      Her Sons too weak the sacred shrine to guard,
      Yet felt some portion of their Mother's pains,
    And never knew, till then, the weight of Despot's chains.


    What! shall it e'er be said by British tongue,
      Albion was happy in Athena's tears?
      Though in thy name the slaves her bosom wrung,
      Tell not the deed to blushing Europe's ears;
      The Ocean Queen, the free Britannia, bears
      The last poor plunder from a bleeding land:
      Yes, she, whose generous aid her name endears,
      Tore down those remnants with a Harpy's hand,
    Which envious Eld forbore, and tyrants left to stand.


    Where was thine Ægis, Pallas! that appalled
      Stern Alaric and Havoc on their way?
      Where Peleus' son? whom Hell in vain enthralled.
      His shade from Hades upon that dread day
      Bursting to light in terrible array!
      What! could not Pluto spare the Chief once more,
      To scare a second robber from his prey?
      Idly he wandered on the Stygian shore,
    Nor now preserved the walls he loved to shield before.


    Cold is the heart, fair Greece! that looks on Thee,
      Nor feels as Lovers o'er the dust they loved;
      Dull is the eye that will not weep to see
      Thy walls defaced, thy mouldering shrines removed
      By British hands, which it had best behoved
      To guard those relics ne'er to be restored:--
      Curst be the hour when from their isle they roved,
      And once again thy hapless bosom gored,
    And snatched thy shrinking Gods to Northern climes abhorred!


    But where is Harold? shall I then forget
      To urge the gloomy Wanderer o'er the wave?
      Little recked he of all that Men regret;
      No loved-one now in feigned lament could rave;
      No friend the parting hand extended gave,
      Ere the cold Stranger passed to other climes:
      Hard is his heart whom charms may not enslave;
      But Harold felt not as in other times,
    And left without a sigh the land of War and Crimes.


    He that has sailed upon the dark blue sea
      Has viewed at times, I ween, a full fair sight,
      When the fresh breeze is fair as breeze may be,
      The white sail set, the gallant Frigate tight--
      Masts, spires, and strand retiring to the right,
      The glorious Main expanding o'er the bow,
      The Convoy spread like wild swans in their flight,
      The dullest sailer wearing bravely now--
    So gaily curl the waves before each dashing prow.


    And oh, the little warlike world within!
      The well-reeved guns, the netted canopy,
      The hoarse command, the busy humming din,
      When, at a word, the tops are manned on high:
      Hark, to the Boatswain's call, the cheering cry!
      While through the seaman's hand the tackle glides;
      Or schoolboy Midshipman that, standing by,
      Strains his shrill pipe as good or ill betides,
    And well the docile crew that skilful Urchin guides.


    White is the glassy deck, without a stain,
      Where on the watch the staid Lieutenant walks:
      Look on that part which sacred doth remain
      For the lone Chieftain, who majestic stalks,
      Silent and feared by all--not oft he talks
      With aught beneath him, if he would preserve
      That strict restraint, which broken, ever balks
      Conquest and Fame: but Britons rarely swerve
    From law, however stern, which tends their strength to nerve.


    Blow! swiftly blow, thou keel-compelling gale!
      Till the broad Sun withdraws his lessening ray:
      Then must the Pennant-bearer slacken sail,
      That lagging barks may make their lazy way.
      Ah! grievance sore, and listless dull delay,
      To waste on sluggish hulks the sweetest breeze!
      What leagues are lost, before the dawn of day,
      Thus loitering pensive on the willing seas,
    The flapping sail hauled down to halt for logs like these!


    The Moon is up; by Heaven, a lovely eve!
      Long streams of light o'er dancing waves expand;
      Now lads on shore may sigh, and maids believe:
      Such be our fate when we return to land!
      Meantime some rude Arion's restless hand
      Wakes the brisk harmony that sailors love;
      A circle there of merry listeners stand
      Or to some well-known measure featly move,
    Thoughtless, as if on shore they still were free to rove.


    Through Calpe's straits survey the steepy shore;
      Europe and Afric on each other gaze!
      Lands of the dark-eyed Maid and dusky Moor
      Alike beheld beneath pale Hecate's blaze:
      How softly on the Spanish shore she plays!
      Disclosing rock, and slope, and forest brown,
      Distinct, though darkening with her waning phase;
      But Mauritania's giant-shadows frown,
    From mountain-cliff to coast descending sombre down.


    'Tis night, when Meditation bids us feel
      We once have loved, though Love is at an end:
      The Heart, lone mourner of its baffled zeal,
      Though friendless now, will dream it had a friend.
      Who with the weight of years would wish to bend,
      When Youth itself survives young Love and Joy?
      Alas! when mingling souls forget to blend,
      Death hath but little left him to destroy!
    Ah! happy years! once more who would not be a boy?


    Thus bending o'er the vessel's laving side,
      To gaze on Dian's wave-reflected sphere,
      The Soul forgets her schemes of Hope and Pride,
      And flies unconscious o'er each backward year;
      None are so desolate but something dear,
      Dearer than self, possesses or possessed
      A thought, and claims the homage of a tear;
      A flashing pang! of which the weary breast
    Would still, albeit in vain, the heavy heart divest.


    To sit on rocks--to muse o'er flood and fell--
      To slowly trace the forest's shady scene,
      Where things that own not Man's dominion dwell,
      And mortal foot hath ne'er or rarely been;
      To climb the trackless mountain all unseen,
      With the wild flock that never needs a fold;
      Alone o'er steeps and foaming falls to lean;
      This is not Solitude--'tis but to hold
    Converse with Nature's charms, and view her stores unrolled.


    But midst the crowd, the hum, the shock of men,
      To hear, to see, to feel, and to possess,
      And roam along, the World's tired denizen,
      With none who bless us, none whom we can bless;
      Minions of Splendour shrinking from distress!
      None that, with kindred consciousness endued,
      If we were not, would seem to smile the less,
      Of all that flattered--followed--sought, and sued:
    This is to be alone--This, This is Solitude!


    More blest the life of godly Eremite,
      Such as on lonely Athos may be seen,
      Watching at eve upon the Giant Height,
      Which looks o'er waves so blue, skies so serene,
      That he who there at such an hour hath been
      Will wistful linger on that hallowed spot;
      Then slowly tear him from the 'witching scene,
      Sigh forth one wish that such had been his lot,
    Then turn to hate a world he had almost forgot.


    Pass we the long unvarying course, the track
      Oft trod, that never leaves a trace behind;
      Pass we the calm--the gale--the change--the tack,
      And each well known caprice of wave and wind;
      Pass we the joys and sorrows sailors find,
      Cooped in their wingéd sea-girt citadel;
      The foul--the fair--the contrary--the kind--
      As breezes rise and fall and billows swell,
    Till on some jocund morn--lo, Land! and All is well!


    But not in silence pass Calypso's isles,
      The sister tenants of the middle deep;
      There for the weary still a Haven smiles,
      Though the fair Goddess long hath ceased to weep,
      And o'er her cliffs a fruitless watch to keep
      For him who dared prefer a mortal bride:
      Here, too, his boy essayed the dreadful leap
      Stern Mentor urged from high to yonder tide;
    While thus of both bereft, the Nymph-Queen doubly sighed.


    Her reign is past, her gentle glories gone:
      But trust not this; too easy Youth, beware!
      A mortal Sovereign holds her dangerous throne,
      And thou may'st find a new Calypso there.
      Sweet Florence could another ever share
      This wayward, loveless heart, it would be thine:
      But checked by every tie, I may not dare
      To cast a worthless offering at thy shrine,
    Nor ask so dear a breast to feel one pang for _mine_.


    Thus Harold deemed, as on that Lady's eye
      He looked, and met its beam without a thought,
      Save Admiration glancing harmless by:
      Love kept aloof, albeit not far remote,
      Who knew his Votary often lost and caught,
      But knew him as his Worshipper no more,
      And ne'er again the Boy his bosom sought:
      Since now he vainly urged him to adore,
    Well deemed the little God his ancient sway was o'er.


    Fair Florence found, in sooth with some amaze,
      One who, 'twas said, still sighed to all he saw,
      Withstand, unmoved, the lustre of her gaze,
      Which others hailed with real or mimic awe,
      Their hope, their doom, their punishment, their law;
      All that gay Beauty from her bondsmen claims:
      And much she marvelled that a youth so raw
      Nor felt, nor feigned at least, the oft-told flames,
    Which though sometimes they frown, yet rarely anger dames.


    Little knew she that seeming marble heart,
      Now masked in silence or withheld by Pride,
      Was not unskilful in the spoiler's art,
      And spread its snares licentious far and wide;
      Nor from the base pursuit had turned aside,
      As long as aught was worthy to pursue:
      But Harold on such arts no more relied;
      And had he doted on those eyes so blue,
    Yet never would he join the lover's whining crew.


    Not much he kens, I ween, of Woman's breast,
      Who thinks that wanton thing is won by sighs;
      What careth she for hearts when once possessed?
      Do proper homage to thine Idol's eyes;
      But not too humbly, or she will despise
      Thee and thy suit, though told in moving tropes:
      Disguise ev'n tenderness, if thou art wise;
      Brisk Confidence still best with woman copes:
    Pique her and soothe in turn--soon Passion crowns thy hopes.


    'Tis an old lesson--Time approves it true,
      And those who know it best, deplore it most;
      When all is won that all desire to woo,
      The paltry prize is hardly worth the cost:
      Youth wasted--Minds degraded--Honour lost--
      These are thy fruits, successful Passion! these!
      If, kindly cruel, early Hope is crost,
      Still to the last it rankles, a disease,
    Not to be cured when Love itself forgets to please.


    Away! nor let me loiter in my song,
      For we have many a mountain-path to tread,
      And many a varied shore to sail along,
      By pensive Sadness, not by Fiction, led--
      Climes, fair withal as ever mortal head
      Imagined in its little schemes of thought;
      Or e'er in new Utopias were ared,
      To teach Man what he might be, or he ought--
    If that corrupted thing could ever such be taught.


    Dear Nature is the kindest mother still!
      Though always changing, in her aspect mild;
      From her bare bosom let me take my fill,
      Her never-weaned, though not her favoured child.
      Oh! she is fairest in her features wild,
      Where nothing polished dares pollute her path:
      To me by day or night she ever smiled,
      Though I have marked her when none other hath,
    And sought her more and more, and loved her best in wrath.


    Land of Albania! where Iskander rose,
      Theme of the young, and beacon of the wise,
      And he his namesake, whose oft-baffled foes
      Shrunk from his deeds of chivalrous emprize:
      Land of Albania! let me bend mine eyes
      On thee, thou rugged Nurse of savage men!
      The Cross descends, thy Minarets arise,
      And the pale Crescent sparkles in the glen,
    Through many a cypress-grove within each city's ken.


    Childe Harold sailed, and passed the barren spot,
      Where sad Penelope o'erlooked the wave;
      And onward viewed the mount, not yet forgot,
      The Lover's refuge, and the Lesbian's grave.
      Dark Sappho! could not Verse immortal save
      That breast imbued with such immortal fire?
      Could she not live who life eternal gave?
      If life eternal may await the lyre,
    That only Heaven to which Earth's children may aspire.


    'Twas on a Grecian autumn's gentle eve
      Childe Harold hailed Leucadia's cape afar;
      A spot he longed to see, nor cared to leave:
      Oft did he mark the scenes of vanished war,
      Actium--Lepanto--fatal Trafalgar;
      Mark them unmoved, for he would not delight
      (Born beneath some remote inglorious star)
      In themes of bloody fray, or gallant fight,
    But loathed the bravo's trade, and laughed at martial wight.


    But when he saw the Evening star above
      Leucadia's far-projecting rock of woe,
      And hailed the last resort of fruitless love,
      He felt, or deemed he felt, no common glow:
      And as the stately vessel glided slow
      Beneath the shadow of that ancient mount,
      He watched the billows' melancholy flow,
      And, sunk albeit in thought as he was wont,
    More placid seemed his eye, and smooth his pallid front.


    Morn dawns; and with it stern Albania's hills,
      Dark Suli's rocks, and Pindus' inland peak,
      Robed half in mist, bedewed with snowy rills,
      Arrayed in many a dun and purple streak,
      Arise; and, as the clouds along them break,
      Disclose the dwelling of the mountaineer:
      Here roams the wolf--the eagle whets his beak--
      Birds--beasts of prey--and wilder men appear,
    And gathering storms around convulse the closing year.


    Now Harold felt himself at length alone,
      And bade to Christian tongues a long adieu;
      Now he adventured on a shore unknown,
      Which all admire, but many dread to view:
      His breast was armed 'gainst fate, his wants were few
      Peril he sought not, but ne'er shrank to meet:
      The scene was savage, but the scene was new;
      _This_ made the ceaseless toil of travel sweet,
    Beat back keen Winter's blast, and welcomed Summer's heat.


    Here the red Cross, for still the Cross is here,
      Though sadly scoffed at by the circumcised,
      Forgets that Pride to pampered priesthood dear;
      Churchman and Votary alike despised.
      Foul Superstition! howsoe'er disguised,
      Idol--Saint--Virgin--Prophet--Crescent--Cross--
      For whatsoever symbol thou art prized,
      Thou sacerdotal gain, but general loss!
    Who from true Worship's gold can separate thy dross?


    Ambracia's gulf behold, where once was lost
      A world for Woman, lovely, harmless thing!
      In yonder rippling bay, their naval host
      Did many a Roman chief and Asian King
      To doubtful conflict, certain slaughter bring:
      Look where the second Cæsar's trophies rose!
      Now, like the hands that reared them, withering:
      Imperial Anarchs, doubling human woes!
    GOD! was thy globe ordained for such to win and lose?


    From the dark barriers of that rugged clime,
      Ev'n to the centre of Illyria's vales,
      Childe Harold passed o'er many a mount sublime,
      Through lands scarce noticed in historic tales:
      Yet in famed Attica such lovely dales
      Are rarely seen; nor can fair Tempe boast
      A charm they know not; loved Parnassus fails,
      Though classic ground and consecrated most,
    To match some spots that lurk within this lowering coast.


    He passed bleak Pindus, Acherusia's lake,
      And left the primal city of the land,
      And onwards did his further journey take
      To greet Albania's Chief, whose dread command
      Is lawless law; for with a bloody hand
      He sways a nation,--turbulent and bold:
      Yet here and there some daring mountain-band
      Disdain his power, and from their rocky hold
    Hurl their defiance far, nor yield, unless to gold.


    Monastic Zitza! from thy shady brow,
      Thou small, but favoured spot of holy ground!
      Where'er we gaze--around--above--below,--
      What rainbow tints, what magic charms are found!
      Rock, river, forest, mountain, all abound,
      And bluest skies that harmonise the whole:
      Beneath, the distant Torrent's rushing sound
      Tells where the volumed Cataract doth roll
    Between those hanging rocks, that shock yet please the soul.


    Amidst the grove that crowns yon tufted hill,
      Which, were it not for many a mountain nigh
      Rising in lofty ranks, and loftier still,
      Might well itself be deemed of dignity,
      The Convent's white walls glisten fair on high:
      Here dwells the caloyer, nor rude is he,
      Nor niggard of his cheer; the passer by
      Is welcome still; nor heedless will he flee
    From hence, if he delight kind Nature's sheen to see.


    Here in the sultriest season let him rest,
      Fresh is the green beneath those aged trees;
      Here winds of gentlest wing will fan his breast,
      From Heaven itself he may inhale the breeze:
      The plain is far beneath--oh! let him seize
      Pure pleasure while he can; the scorching ray
      Here pierceth not, impregnate with disease:
      Then let his length the loitering pilgrim lay,
    And gaze, untired, the Morn--the Noon--the Eve away.


    Dusky and huge, enlarging on the sight,
      Nature's volcanic Amphitheatre,
      Chimæra's Alps extend from left to right:
      Beneath, a living valley seems to stir;
      Flocks play, trees wave, streams flow, the mountain-fir
      Nodding above; behold black Acheron!
      Once consecrated to the sepulchre.
      Pluto! if this be Hell I look upon,
    Close shamed Elysium's gates, my shade shall seek for none.


    Ne city's towers pollute the lovely view;
      Unseen is Yanina, though not remote,
      Veiled by the screen of hills: here men are few,
      Scanty the hamlet, rare the lonely cot:
      But, peering down each precipice, the goat
      Browseth; and, pensive o'er his scattered flock,
      The little shepherd in his white capote
      Doth lean his boyish form along the rock,
    Or in his cave awaits the Tempest's short-lived shock.


    Oh! where, Dodona! is thine aged Grove,
      Prophetic Fount, and Oracle divine?
      What valley echoed the response of Jove?
      What trace remaineth of the Thunderer's shrine?
      All, all forgotten--and shall Man repine
      That his frail bonds to fleeting life are broke?
      Cease, Fool! the fate of Gods may well be thine:
      Wouldst thou survive the marble or the oak?
    When nations, tongues, and worlds must sink beneath the stroke!


    Epirus' bounds recede, and mountains fail;
      Tired of up-gazing still, the wearied eye
      Reposes gladly on as smooth a vale
      As ever Spring yclad in grassy dye:
      Ev'n on a plain no humble beauties lie,
      Where some bold river breaks the long expanse,
      And woods along the banks are waving high,
      Whose shadows in the glassy waters dance,
    Or with the moonbeam sleep in Midnight's solemn trance.


    The Sun had sunk behind vast Tomerit,
      And Laos wide and fierce came roaring by;
      The shades of wonted night were gathering yet,
      When, down the steep banks winding warily,
      Childe Harold saw, like meteors in the sky,
      The glittering minarets of Tepalen,
      Whose walls o'erlook the stream; and drawing nigh,
      He heard the busy hum of warrior-men
    Swelling the breeze that sighed along the lengthening glen.


    He passed the sacred Haram's silent tower,
      And underneath the wide o'erarching gate
      Surveyed the dwelling of this Chief of power,
      Where all around proclaimed his high estate.
      Amidst no common pomp the Despot sate,
      While busy preparation shook the court,
      Slaves, eunuchs, soldiers, guests, and santons wait;
      Within, a palace, and without, a fort:
    Here men of every clime appear to make resort.


    Richly caparisoned, a ready row
      Of arméd horse, and many a warlike store,
      Circled the wide-extending court below;
      Above, strange groups adorned the corridore;
      And oft-times through the area's echoing door
      Some high-capped Tartar spurred his steed away:
      The Turk--the Greek--the Albanian--and the Moor,
      Here mingled in their many-hued array,
    While the deep war-drum's sound announced the close of day.


    The wild Albanian kirtled to his knee,
      With shawl-girt head and ornamented gun,
      And gold-embroidered garments, fair to see;
      The crimson-scarféd men of Macedon;
      The Delhi with his cap of terror on,
      And crooked glaive--the lively, supple Greek
      And swarthy Nubia's mutilated son;
      The bearded Turk that rarely deigns to speak,
    Master of all around, too potent to be meek,


    Are mixed conspicuous: some recline in groups,
      Scanning the motley scene that varies round;
      There some grave Moslem to devotion stoops,
      And some that smoke, and some that play, are found;
      Here the Albanian proudly treads the ground;
      Half-whispering there the Greek is heard to prate;
      Hark! from the Mosque the nightly solemn sound,
      The Muezzin's call doth shake the minaret,
    "There is no god but God!--to prayer--lo! God is great!"


    Just at this season Ramazani's fast
      Through the long day its penance did maintain:
      But when the lingering twilight hour was past,
      Revel and feast assumed the rule again:
      Now all was bustle, and the menial train
      Prepared and spread the plenteous board within;
      The vacant Gallery now seemed made in vain,
      But from the chambers came the mingling din,
    As page and slave anon were passing out and in.


    Here woman's voice is never heard: apart,
      And scarce permitted, guarded, veiled, to move,k
      She yields to one her person and her heart,
      Tamed to her cage, nor feels a wish to rove:
      For, not unhappy in her Master's love,
      And joyful in a mother's gentlest cares,
      Blest cares! all other feelings far above!
      Herself more sweetly rears the babe she bears
    Who never quits the breast--no meaner passion shares.


    In marble-paved pavilion, where a spring
      Of living water from the centre rose,
      Whose bubbling did a genial freshness fling,
      And soft voluptuous couches breathed repose,
      ALI reclined, a man of war and woes:
      Yet in his lineaments ye cannot trace,
      While Gentleness her milder radiance throws
      Along that agéd venerable face,
    The deeds that lurk beneath, and stain him with disgrace.


    It is not that yon hoary lengthening beard
      Ill suits the passions which belong to Youth;
      Love conquers Age--so Hafiz hath averr'd,
      So sings the Teian, and he sings in sooth--
      But crimes that scorn the tender voice of ruth,
      Beseeming all men ill, but most the man
      In years, have marked him with a tiger's tooth;
      Blood follows blood, and, through their mortal span,
    In bloodier acts conclude those who with blood began.


    'Mid many things most new to ear and eye
      The Pilgrim rested here his weary feet,
      And gazed around on Moslem luxury,
      Till quickly, wearied with that spacious seat
      Of Wealth and Wantonness, the choice retreat
      Of sated Grandeur from the city's noise:
      And were it humbler it in sooth were sweet;
      But Peace abhorreth artificial joys,
    And Pleasure, leagued with Pomp, the zest of both destroys.


    Fierce are Albania's children, yet they lack
      Not virtues, were those virtues more mature.
      Where is the foe that ever saw their back?
      Who can so well the toil of War endure?
      Their native fastnesses not more secure
      Than they in doubtful time of troublous need:
      Their wrath how deadly! but their friendship sure,
      When Gratitude or Valour bids them bleed,
    Unshaken rushing on where'er their Chief may lead.


    Childe Harold saw them in their Chieftain's tower
      Thronging to War in splendour and success;
      And after viewed them, when, within their power,
      Himself awhile the victim of distress;
      That saddening hour when bad men hotlier press:
      But these did shelter him beneath their roof,
      When less barbarians would have cheered him less,
      And fellow-countrymen have stood aloof--
    In aught that tries the heart, how few withstand the proof!


    It chanced that adverse winds once drove his bark
      Full on the coast of Suli's shaggy shore,
      When all around was desolate and dark;
      To land was perilous, to sojourn more;
      Yet for awhile the mariners forbore,
      Dubious to trust where Treachery might lurk:
      At length they ventured forth, though doubting sore
      That those who loathe alike the Frank and Turk
    Might once again renew their ancient butcher-work.


    Vain fear! the Suliotes stretched the welcome hand,
      Led them o'er rocks and past the dangerous swamp,
      Kinder than polished slaves though not so bland,
      And piled the hearth, and wrung their garments damp,
      And filled the bowl, and trimmed the cheerful lamp,
      And spread their fare; though homely, all they had:
      Such conduct bears Philanthropy's rare stamp:
      To rest the weary and to soothe the sad,
    Doth lesson happier men, and shames at least the bad.


    It came to pass, that when he did address
      Himself to quit at length this mountain-land,
      Combined marauders half-way barred egress,
      And wasted far and near with glaive and brand;
      And therefore did he take a trusty band
      To traverse Acarnania's forest wide,
      In war well-seasoned, and with labours tanned,
      Till he did greet white Achelous' tide,
    And from his further bank Ætolia's wolds espied.


    Where lone Utraikey forms its circling cove,
      And weary waves retire to gleam at rest,
      How brown the foliage of the green hill's grove,
      Nodding at midnight o'er the calm bay's breast,
      As winds come lightly whispering from the West,
      Kissing, not ruffling, the blue deep's serene:--
      Here Harold was received a welcome guest;
      Nor did he pass unmoved the gentle scene,
    For many a joy could he from Night's soft presence glean.


    On the smooth shore the night-fires brightly blazed,
      The feast was done, the red wine circling fast,
      And he that unawares had there ygazed
      With gaping wonderment had stared aghast;
      For ere night's midmost, stillest hour was past,
      The native revels of the troop began;
      Each Palikar his sabre from him cast,
      And bounding hand in hand, man linked to man,
    Yelling their uncouth dirge, long daunced the kirtled clan.


    Childe Harold at a little distance stood
      And viewed, but not displeased, the revelrie,
      Nor hated harmless mirth, however rude:
      In sooth, it was no vulgar sight to see
      Their barbarous, yet their not indecent, glee;
      And, as the flames along their faces gleamed,
      Their gestures nimble, dark eyes flashing free,
      The long wild locks that to their girdles streamed,

    Tambourgi! Tambourgi! thy 'larum afar
    Gives hope to the valiant, and promise of war;
    All the Sons of the mountains arise at the note,
    Chimariot, Illyrian, and dark Suliote!

    Oh! who is more brave than a dark Suliote,
    In his snowy camese and his shaggy capote?
    To the wolf and the vulture he leaves his wild flock,
    And descends to the plain like the stream from the rock.

    Shall the sons of Chimari, who never forgive
    The fault of a friend, bid an enemy live?
    Let those guns so unerring such vengeance forego?
    What mark is so fair as the breast of a foe?

    Macedonia sends forth her invincible race;
    For a time they abandon the cave and the chase:
    But those scarfs of blood-red shall be redder, before
    The sabre is sheathed and the battle is o'er.

    Then the Pirates of Parga that dwell by the waves,
    And teach the pale Franks what it is to be slaves,
    Shall leave on the beach the long galley and oar,
    And track to his covert the captive on shore.

    I ask not the pleasures that riches supply,
    My sabre shall win what the feeble must buy;
    Shall win the young bride with her long flowing hair,
    And many a maid from her mother shall tear.

    I love the fair face of the maid in her youth,
    Her caresses shall lull me, her music shall soothe;
    Let her bring from the chamber her many-toned lyre,
    And sing us a song on the fall of her Sire.

    Remember the moment when Previsa fell,
    The shrieks of the conquered, the conquerors' yell;
    The roofs that we fired, and the plunder we shared,
    The wealthy we slaughtered, the lovely we spared.

    I talk not of mercy, I talk not of fear;
    He neither must know who would serve the Vizier:
    Since the days of our Prophet the Crescent ne'er saw
    A chief ever glorious like Ali Pashaw.

    Dark Muchtar his son to the Danube is sped,
    Let the yellow-haired Giaours
                                      view his horse-tail with dread;
    When his Delhis come dashing in blood o'er the banks,
    How few shall escape from the Muscovite ranks!

    Selictar! unsheathe then our chief's Scimitār;
    Tambourgi! thy 'larum gives promise of War.
    Ye Mountains, that see us descend to the shore,
    Shall view us as Victors, or view us no more!


    Fair Greece! sad relic of departed Worth!
      Immortal, though no more; though fallen, great!
      Who now shall lead thy scattered children forth,
      And long accustomed bondage uncreate?
      Not such thy sons who whilome did await,
      The helpless warriors of a willing doom,
      In bleak Thermopylae's sepulchral strait--
      Oh! who that gallant spirit shall resume,
    Leap from Eurotas' banks, and call thee from the tomb?


    Spirit of Freedom! when on Phyle's brow
      Thou sat'st with Thrasybulus and his train,
      Couldst thou forebode the dismal hour which now
      Dims the green beauties of thine Attic plain?
      Not thirty tyrants now enforce the chain,
      But every carle can lord it o'er thy land;
      Nor rise thy sons, but idly rail in vain,
      Trembling beneath the scourge of Turkish hand,
    From birth till death enslaved; in word, in deed, unmanned.


    In all save form alone, how changed! and who
      That marks the fire still sparkling in each eye,
      Who but would deem their bosoms burned anew
      With thy unquenchéd beam, lost Liberty!
      And many dream withal the hour is nigh
      That gives them back their fathers' heritage:
      For foreign arms and aid they fondly sigh,
      Nor solely dare encounter hostile rage,
    Or tear their name defiled from Slavery's mournful page.


    Hereditary Bondsmen! know ye not
      _Who_ would be free _themselves_ must strike the blow?
      By their right arms the conquest must be wrought?
      Will Gaul or Muscovite redress ye? No!
      True--they may lay your proud despoilers low,
      But not for you will Freedom's Altars flame.
      Shades of the Helots! triumph o'er your foe!
      Greece! change thy lords, thy state is still the same;
    Thy glorious day is o'er, but not thine years of shame.


    The city won for Allah from the Giaour
      The Giaour from Othman's race again may wrest;
      And the Serai's impenetrable tower
      Receive the fiery Frank, her former guest;
      Or Wahab's rebel brood who dared divest
      The Prophet's tomb of all its pious spoil,
      May wind their path of blood along the West;
      But ne'er will Freedom seek this fated soil,
    But slave succeed to slave through years of endless toil.


    Yet mark their mirth--ere Lenten days begin,
      That penance which their holy rites prepare
      To shrive from Man his weight of mortal sin,
      By daily abstinence and nightly prayer;
      But ere his sackcloth garb Repentance wear,
      Some days of joyaunce are decreed to all,
      To take of pleasaunce each his secret share,
      In motley robe to dance at masking ball,
    And join the mimic train of merry Carnival.


    And whose more rife with merriment than thine,
      Oh Stamboul! once the Empress of their reign?
      Though turbans now pollute Sophia's shrine,
      And Greece her very altars eyes in vain:
      (Alas! her woes will still pervade my strain!)
      Gay were her minstrels once, for free her throng,
      All felt the common joy they now must feign,
      Nor oft I've seen such sight, nor heard such song,
    As wooed the eye, and thrilled the Bosphorus along.


    Loud was the lightsome tumult on the shore,
      Oft Music changed, but never ceased her tone,
      And timely echoed back the measured oar,
      And rippling waters made a pleasant moan:
      The Queen of tides on high consenting shone,
      And when a transient breeze swept o'er the wave,
      'Twas, as if darting from her heavenly throne,
      A brighter glance her form reflected gave,
    Till sparkling billows seemed to light the banks they lave.


    Glanced many a light Caique along the foam,
      Danced on the shore the daughters of the land,
      No thought had man or maid of rest or home,
      While many a languid eye and thrilling hand
      Exchanged the look few bosoms may withstand,
      Or gently prest, returned the pressure still:
      Oh Love! young Love! bound in thy rosy band,
      Let sage or cynic prattle as he will,
    These hours, and only these, redeem Life's years of ill!


    But, midst the throng in merry masquerade,
      Lurk there no hearts that throb with secret pain,
      Even through the closest searment half betrayed?
      To such the gentle murmurs of the main
      Seem to re-echo all they mourn in vain;
      To such the gladness of the gamesome crowd
      Is source of wayward thought and stern disdain:
      How do they loathe the laughter idly loud,
    And long to change the robe of revel for the shroud!


    This must he feel, the true-born son of Greece,
      If Greece one true-born patriot still can boast:
      Not such as prate of War, but skulk in Peace,
      The bondsman's peace, who sighs for all he lost,
      Yet with smooth smile his Tyrant can accost,
      And wield the slavish sickle, not the sword:
      Ah! Greece! they love thee least who owe thee most--
      Their birth, their blood, and that sublime record
    Of hero Sires, who shame thy now degenerate horde!


    When riseth Lacedemon's Hardihood,
      When Thebes Epaminondas rears again,
      When Athens' children are with hearts endued,
      When Grecian mothers shall give birth to men,
      Then may'st thou be restored; but not till then.
      A thousand years scarce serve to form a state;
      An hour may lay it in the dust: and when
      Can Man its shattered splendour renovate,
    Recall its virtues back, and vanquish Time and Fate?


    And yet how lovely in thine age of woe,
      Land of lost Gods and godlike men, art thou!
      Thy vales of evergreen, thy hills of snow,
      Proclaim thee Nature's varied favourite now:
      Thy fanes, thy temples to thy surface bow,
      Commingling slowly with heroic earth,
      Broke by the share of every rustic plough:
      So perish monuments of mortal birth,
    So perish all in turn, save well-recorded _Worth_:


    Save where some solitary column mourns
      Above its prostrate brethren of the cave;
      Save where Tritonia's airy shrine adorns
      Colonna's cliff, and gleams along the wave;
      Save o'er some warrior's half-forgotten grave,
      Where the gray stones and unmolested grass
      Ages, but not Oblivion, feebly brave;
      While strangers, only, not regardless pass,
    Lingering like me, perchance, to gaze, and sigh "Alas!"


    Yet are thy skies as blue, thy crags as wild;
      Sweet are thy groves, and verdant are thy fields,
      Thine olive ripe as when Minerva smiled,
      And still his honied wealth Hymettus yields;
      There the blithe Bee his fragrant fortress builds,
      The free-born wanderer of thy mountain-air;
      Apollo still thy long, long summer gilds,
      Still in his beam Mendeli's marbles glare:
    Art, Glory, Freedom fail, but Nature still is fair.


    Where'er we tread 'tis haunted, holy ground;
      No earth of thine is lost in vulgar mould,
      But one vast realm of Wonder spreads around,
      And all the Muse's tales seem truly told,
      Till the sense aches with gazing to behold
      The scenes our earliest dreams have dwelt upon;
      Each hill and dale, each deepening glen and wold
      Defies the power which crushed thy temples gone:
    Age shakes Athenæ's tower, but spares gray Marathon.


    The Sun, the soil--but not the slave, the same;--
      Unchanged in all except its foreign Lord,
      Preserves alike its bounds and boundless fame
      The Battle-field, where Persia's victim horde
      First bowed beneath the brunt of Hellas' sword,
      As on the morn to distant Glory dear,
      When Marathon became a magic word;
      Which uttered, to the hearer's eye appear
    The camp, the host, the fight, the Conqueror's career,


    The flying Mede, his shaftless broken bow--
      The fiery Greek, his red pursuing spear;
      Mountains above--Earth's, Ocean's plain below--
      Death in the front, Destruction in the rear!
      Such was the scene--what now remaineth here?
      What sacred Trophy marks the hallowed ground,
      Recording Freedom's smile and Asia's tear?
      The rifled urn, the violated mound,
    The dust thy courser's hoof, rude stranger! spurns around.


    Yet to the remnants of thy Splendour past
      Shall pilgrims, pensive, but unwearied, throng;
      Long shall the voyager, with th' Ionian blast,
      Hail the bright clime of Battle and of Song:
      Long shall thine annals and immortal tongue
      Fill with thy fame the youth of many a shore;
      Boast of the agéd! lesson of the young!
      Which Sages venerate and Bards adore,
    As Pallas and the Muse unveil their awful lore.


    The parted bosom clings to wonted home,
      If aught that's kindred cheer the welcome hearth;
      He that is lonely--hither let him roam,
      And gaze complacent on congenial earth.
      Greece is no lightsome land of social mirth:
      But he whom Sadness sootheth may abide,
      And scarce regret the region of his birth,
      When wandering slow by Delphi's sacred side,
    Or gazing o'er the plains where Greek and Persian died.


    Let such approach this consecrated Land,
      And pass in peace along the magic waste;
      But spare its relics--let no busy hand
      Deface the scenes, already how defaced!
      Not for such purpose were these altars placed:
      Revere the remnants Nations once revered:
      So may our Country's name be undisgraced,
      So may'st thou prosper where thy youth was reared,
    By every honest joy of Love and Life endeared!


    For thee, who thus in too protracted song
      Hast soothed thine Idlesse with inglorious lays,
      Soon shall thy voice be lost amid the throng
      Of louder Minstrels in these later days:
      To such resign the strife for fading Bays--
      Ill may such contest now the spirit move
      Which heeds nor keen Reproach nor partial Praise,
      Since cold each kinder heart that might approve--
    And none are left to please when none are left to love.


    Thou too art gone, thou loved and lovely one!
      Whom Youth and Youth's affections bound to me;
      Who did for me what none beside have done,
      Nor shrank from one albeit unworthy thee.
      What is my Being! thou hast ceased to be!
      Nor staid to welcome here thy wanderer home,
      Who mourns o'er hours which we no more shall see--
      Would they had never been, or were to come!
    Would he had ne'er returned to find fresh cause to roam!


    Oh! ever loving, lovely, and beloved!
      How selfish Sorrow ponders on the past,
      And clings to thoughts now better far removed!
      But Time shall tear thy shadow from me last.
      All thou couldst have of mine, stern Death! thou hast;
      The Parent, Friend, and now the more than Friend:
      Ne'er yet for one thine arrows flew so fast,
      And grief with grief continuing still to blend,
    Hath snatched the little joy that Life had yet to lend.


    Then must I plunge again into the crowd,
      And follow all that Peace disdains to seek?
      Where Revel calls, and Laughter, vainly loud,
      False to the heart, distorts the hollow cheek,
      To leave the flagging spirit doubly weak;
      Still o'er the features, which perforce they cheer,
      To feign the pleasure or conceal the pique:
      Smiles form the channel of a future tear,
    Or raise the writhing lip with ill-dissembled sneer.


    What is the worst of woes that wait on Age?
      What stamps the wrinkle deeper on the brow?
      To view each loved one blotted from Life's page,
      And be alone on earth, as I am now.
      Before the Chastener humbly let me bow,
      O'er Hearts divided and o'er Hopes destroyed:
      Roll on, vain days! full reckless may ye flow,
      Since Time hath reft whate'er my soul enjoyed,
    And with the ills of Eld mine earlier years alloyed.




       Thou hast nor youth nor age
       But as it were an after dinner sleep
       Dreaming of both.


     Here I am, an old man in a dry month,
     Being read to by a boy, waiting for rain.
     I was neither at the hot gates
     Nor fought in the warm rain
     Nor knee deep in the salt marsh, heaving a cutlass,
     Bitten by flies, fought.
     My house is a decayed house,
     And the jew squats on the window sill, the owner,
     Spawned in some estaminet of Antwerp,
     Blistered in Brussels, patched and peeled in London.
     The goat coughs at night in the field overhead;
     Rocks, moss, stonecrop, iron, merds.
     The woman keeps the kitchen, makes tea,
     Sneezes at evening, poking the peevish gutter.

                       I an old man,
     A dull head among windy spaces.

     Signs are taken for wonders. "We would see a sign":
     The word within a word, unable to speak a word,
     Swaddled with darkness. In the juvescence of the year
     Came Christ the tiger

     In depraved May, dogwood and chestnut, flowering Judas,
     To be eaten, to be divided, to be drunk
     Among whispers; by Mr. Silvero
     With caressing hands, at Limoges
     Who walked all night in the next room;
     By Hakagawa, bowing among the Titians;
     By Madame de Tornquist, in the dark room
     Shifting the candles; Fraulein von Kulp
     Who turned in the hall, one hand on the door. Vacant shuttles
     Weave the wind. I have no ghosts,
     An old man in a draughty house
     Under a windy knob.

     After such knowledge, what forgiveness? Think now
     History has many cunning passages, contrived corridors
     And issues, deceives with whispering ambitions,
     Guides us by vanities. Think now
     She gives when our attention is distracted
     And what she gives, gives with such supple confusions
     That the giving famishes the craving. Gives too late
     What's not believed in, or if still believed,
     In memory only, reconsidered passion. Gives too soon
     Into weak hands, what's thought can be dispensed with
     Till the refusal propagates a fear. Think
     Neither fear nor courage saves us. Unnatural vices
     Are fathered by our heroism. Virtues
     Are forced upon us by our impudent crimes.
     These tears are shaken from the wrath-bearing tree.

     The tiger springs in the new year. Us he devours. Think at last
     We have not reached conclusion, when I
     Stiffen in a rented house. Think at last
     I have not made this show purposelessly
     And it is not by any concitation
     Of the backward devils.
     I would meet you upon this honestly.
     I that was near your heart was removed therefrom
     To lose beauty in terror, terror in inquisition.
     I have lost my passion: why should I need to keep it
     Since what is kept must be adulterated?
     I have lost my sight, smell, hearing, taste and touch:
     How should I use it for your closer contact?

     These with a thousand small deliberations
     Protract the profit of their chilled delirium,
     Excite the membrane, when the sense has cooled,
     With pungent sauces, multiply variety
     In a wilderness of mirrors. What will the spider do,
     Suspend its operations, will the weevil
     Delay? De Bailhache, Fresca, Mrs. Cammel, whirled
     Beyond the circuit of the shuddering Bear
     In fractured atoms. Gull against the wind, in the windy straits
     Of Belle Isle, or running on the Horn,
     White feathers in the snow, the Gulf claims,
     And an old man driven by the Trades
     To a sleepy corner.

                       Tenants of the house,
     Thoughts of a dry brain in a dry season.





       Tra-la-la-la-la-la-laire--nil nisi divinum stabile
       est; caetera fumus--the gondola stopped, the old
       palace was there, how charming its grey and pink--
       goats and monkeys, with such hair too!--so the
       countess passed on until she came through the
       little park, where Niobe presented her with a
       cabinet, and so departed.


     Burbank crossed a little bridge
     Descending at a small hotel;
     Princess Volupine arrived,
     They were together, and he fell.

     Defunctive music under sea
     Passed seaward with the passing bell
     Slowly: the God Hercules
     Had left him, that had loved him well.

     The horses, under the axletree
     Beat up the dawn from Istria
     With even feet. Her shuttered barge
     Burned on the water all the day.

     But this or such was Bleistein's way:
     A saggy bending of the knees
     And elbows, with the palms turned out,
     Chicago Semite Viennese.

     A lustreless protrusive eye
     Stares from the protozoic slime
     At a perspective of Canaletto.
     The smoky candle end of time

     Declines. On the Rialto once.
     The rats are underneath the piles.
     The jew is underneath the lot.
     Money in furs. The boatman smiles,

     Princess Volupine extends
     A meagre, blue-nailed, phthisic hand
     To climb the waterstair. Lights, lights,
     She entertains Sir Ferdinand

     Klein. Who clipped the lion's wings
     And flea'd his rump and pared his claws?
     Thought Burbank, meditating on
     Time's ruins, and the seven laws.





                           And the trees about me,
       Let them be dry and leafless; let the rocks
       Groan with continual surges; and behind me
       Make all a desolation. Look, look, wenches!


     Paint me a cavernous waste shore
     Cast in the unstilted Cyclades,
     Paint me the bold anfractuous rocks
     Faced by the snarled and yelping seas.

     Display me Aeolus above
     Reviewing the insurgent gales
     Which tangle Ariadne's hair
     And swell with haste the perjured sails.

     Morning stirs the feet and hands
     (Nausicaa and Polypheme),
     Gesture of orang-outang
     Rises from the sheets in steam.

     This withered root of knots of hair
     Slitted below and gashed with eyes,
     This oval O cropped out with teeth:
     The sickle motion from the thighs

     Jackknifes upward at the knees
     Then straightens out from heel to hip
     Pushing the framework of the bed
     And clawing at the pillow slip.

     Sweeney addressed full length to shave
     Broadbottomed, pink from nape to base,
     Knows the female temperament
     And wipes the suds around his face.

     (The lengthened shadow of a man
     Is history, said Emerson
     Who had not seen the silhouette
     Of Sweeney straddled in the sun).

     Tests the razor on his leg
     Waiting until the shriek subsides.
     The epileptic on the bed
     Curves backward, clutching at her sides.

     The ladies of the corridor
     Find themselves involved, disgraced,
     Call witness to their principles
     And deprecate the lack of taste

     Observing that hysteria
     Might easily be misunderstood;
     Mrs. Turner intimates
     It does the house no sort of good.

     But Doris, towelled from the bath,
     Enters padding on broad feet,
     Bringing sal volatile
     And a glass of brandy neat.





       En l'an trentiesme de mon aage
       Que toutes mes hontes j'ay beues...


     Pipit sate upright in her chair
       Some distance from where I was sitting;
     Views of the Oxford Colleges
       Lay on the table, with the knitting.

     Daguerreotypes and silhouettes,
       Her grandfather and great great aunts,
     Supported on the mantelpiece
       An Invitation to the Dance.
     I shall not want Honour in Heaven
       For I shall meet Sir Philip Sidney
     And have talk with Coriolanus
       And other heroes of that kidney.

     I shall not want Capital in Heaven
       For I shall meet Sir Alfred Mond:
     We two shall lie together, lapt
       In a five per cent Exchequer Bond.

     I shall not want Society in Heaven,
       Lucretia Borgia shall be my Bride;
     Her anecdotes will be more amusing
       Than Pipit's experience could provide.

     I shall not want Pipit in Heaven:
       Madame Blavatsky will instruct me
     In the Seven Sacred Trances;
       Piccarda de Donati will conduct me.


     But where is the penny world I bought
       To eat with Pipit behind the screen?
     The red-eyed scavengers are creeping
       From Kentish Town and Golder's Green;

     Where are the eagles and the trumpets?

       Buried beneath some snow-deep Alps.
     Over buttered scones and crumpets
       Weeping, weeping multitudes
     Droop in a hundred A.B.C.'s


       And when this epistle is read among you, cause
       that it be read also in the church of the
       Laodiceans.


     The broad-backed hippopotamus
     Rests on his belly in the mud;
     Although he seems so firm to us
     He is merely flesh and blood.

     Flesh-and-blood is weak and frail,
     Susceptible to nervous shock;
     While the True Church can never fail
     For it is based upon a rock.

     The hippo's feeble steps may err
     In compassing material ends,
     While the True Church need never stir
     To gather in its dividends.

     The 'potamus can never reach
     The mango on the mango-tree;
     But fruits of pomegranate and peach
     Refresh the Church from over sea.

     At mating time the hippo's voice
     Betrays inflexions hoarse and odd,
     But every week we hear rejoice
     The Church, at being one with God.

     The hippopotamus's day
     Is passed in sleep; at night he hunts;
     God works in a mysterious way-
     The Church can sleep and feed at once.

     I saw the 'potamus take wing
     Ascending from the damp savannas,
     And quiring angels round him sing
     The praise of God, in loud hosannas.

     Blood of the Lamb shall wash him clean
     And him shall heavenly arms enfold,
     Among the saints he shall be seen
     Performing on a harp of gold.

     He shall be washed as white as snow,
     By all the martyr'd virgins kiss,
     While the True Church remains below
     Wrapt in the old miasmal mist.





     Webster was much possessed by death
     And saw the skull beneath the skin;
     And breastless creatures under ground
     Leaned backward with a lipless grin.

     Daffodil bulbs instead of balls
     Stared from the sockets of the eyes!
     He knew that thought clings round dead limbs
     Tightening its lusts and luxuries.

     Donne, I suppose, was such another
     Who found no substitute for sense;
     To seize and clutch and penetrate,
     Expert beyond experience,

     He knew the anguish of the marrow
     The ague of the skeleton;
     No contact possible to flesh
     Allayed the fever of the bone.


     Grishkin is nice: her Russian eye
     Is underlined for emphasis;
     Uncorseted, her friendly bust
     Gives promise of pneumatic bliss.

     The couched Brazilian jaguar
     Compels the scampering marmoset
     With subtle effluence of cat;
     Grishkin has a maisonette;

     The sleek Brazilian jaguar
     Does not in its arboreal gloom
     Distil so rank a feline smell
     As Grishkin in a drawing-room.

     And even the Abstract Entities
     Circumambulate her charm;
     But our lot crawls between dry ribs
     To keep our metaphysics warm.





       Look, look, master, here comes two religious
       caterpillars.


     Polyphiloprogenitive
     The sapient sutlers of the Lord
     Drift across the window-panes.
     In the beginning was the Word.

     In the beginning was the Word.
     Superfetation of,
     And at the mensual turn of time
     Produced enervate Origen.

     A painter of the Umbrian school
     Designed upon a gesso ground
     The nimbus of the Baptized God.
     The wilderness is cracked and browned

     But through the water pale and thin
     Still shine the unoffending feet
     And there above the painter set
     The Father and the Paraclete.
     The sable presbyters approach
     The avenue of penitence;
     The young are red and pustular
     Clutching piaculative pence.

     Under the penitential gates
     Sustained by staring Seraphim
     Where the souls of the devout
     Burn invisible and dim.

     Along the garden-wall the bees
     With hairy bellies pass between
     The staminate and pistilate,
     Blest office of the epicene.

     Sweeney shifts from ham to ham
     Stirring the water in his bath.
     The masters of the subtle schools
     Are controversial, polymath.





     Apeneck Sweeney spreads his knees
     Letting his arms hang down to laugh,
     The zebra stripes along his jaw
     Swelling to maculate giraffe.

     The circles of the stormy moon
     Slide westward toward the River Plate,
     Death and the Raven drift above
     And Sweeney guards the hornèd gate.

     Gloomy Orion and the Dog
     Are veiled; and hushed the shrunken seas;
     The person in the Spanish cape
     Tries to sit on Sweeney's knees

     Slips and pulls the table cloth
     Overturns a coffee-cup,
     Reorganized upon the floor
     She yawns and draws a stocking up;

     The silent man in mocha brown
     Sprawls at the window-sill and gapes;
     The waiter brings in oranges
     Bananas figs and hothouse grapes;

     The silent vertebrate in brown
     Contracts and concentrates, withdraws;
     Rachel née Rabinovitch
     Tears at the grapes with murderous paws;

     She and the lady in the cape
     Are suspect, thought to be in league;
     Therefore the man with heavy eyes
     Declines the gambit, shows fatigue,

     Leaves the room and reappears
     Outside the window, leaning in,
     Branches of wisteria
     Circumscribe a golden grin;

     The host with someone indistinct
     Converses at the door apart,
     The nightingales are singing near
     The Convent of the Sacred Heart,

     And sang within the bloody wood
     When Agamemnon cried aloud,
     And let their liquid droppings fall
     To stain the stiff dishonoured shroud.





     Let us go then, you and I,
     When the evening is spread out against the sky
     Like a patient etherized upon a table;
     Let us go, through certain half-deserted streets,
     The muttering retreats
     Of restless nights in one-night cheap hotels
     And sawdust restaurants with oyster-shells:
     Streets that follow like a tedious argument
     Of insidious intent
     To lead you to an overwhelming question....
     Oh, do not ask, "What is it?"
     Let us go and make our visit.

     In the room the women come and go
     Talking of Michelangelo.

     The yellow fog that rubs its back upon the window-panes,
     The yellow smoke that rubs its muzzle on the window-panes
     Licked its tongue into the corners of the evening,
     Lingered upon the pools that stand in drains,
     Let fall upon its back the soot that falls from chimneys,
     Slipped by the terrace, made a sudden leap,
     And seeing that it was a soft October night,
     Curled once about the house, and fell asleep.

     And indeed there will be time
     For the yellow smoke that slides along the street,
     Rubbing its back upon the window panes;
     There will be time, there will be time
     To prepare a face to meet the faces that you meet
     There will be time to murder and create,
     And time for all the works and days of hands
     That lift and drop a question on your plate;
     Time for you and time for me,
     And time yet for a hundred indecisions,
     And for a hundred visions and revisions,
     Before the taking of a toast and tea.

     In the room the women come and go
     Talking of Michelangelo.

     And indeed there will be time
     To wonder, "Do I dare?" and, "Do I dare?"
     Time to turn back and descend the stair,
     With a bald spot in the middle of my hair--
     (They will say: "How his hair is growing thin!")
     My morning coat, my collar mounting firmly to the chin,
     My necktie rich and modest, but asserted by a simple pin--
     (They will say: "But how his arms and legs are thin!")
     Do I dare
     Disturb the universe?
     In a minute there is time
     For decisions and revisions which a minute will reverse.

     For I have known them all already, known them all:
     Have known the evenings, mornings, afternoons,
     I have measured out my life with coffee spoons;
     I know the voices dying with a dying fall
     Beneath the music from a farther room.
       So how should I presume?

     And I have known the eyes already, known them all--
     The eyes that fix you in a formulated phrase,
     And when I am formulated, sprawling on a pin,
     When I am pinned and wriggling on the wall,
     Then how should I begin
     To spit out all the butt-ends of my days and ways?
       And how should I presume?

     And I have known the arms already, known them all--
     Arms that are braceleted and white and bare
     (But in the lamplight, downed with light brown hair!)
     Is it perfume from a dress
     That makes me so digress?
     Arms that lie along a table, or wrap about a shawl.
       And should I then presume?
       And how should I begin?
     Shall I say, I have gone at dusk through narrow streets
     And watched the smoke that rises from the pipes
     Of lonely men in shirt-sleeves, leaning out of windows?

     I should have been a pair of ragged claws
     Scuttling across the floors of silent seas.

     And the afternoon, the evening, sleeps so peacefully!
     Smoothed by long fingers,
     Asleep... tired... or it malingers.
     Stretched on the floor, here beside you and me.
     Should I, after tea and cakes and ices,
     Have the strength to force the moment to its crisis?
     But though I have wept and fasted, wept and prayed,
     Though I have seen my head (grown slightly bald) brought in upon a platter,
     I am no prophet--and here's no great matter;
     I have seen the moment of my greatness flicker,
     And I have seen the eternal Footman hold my coat, and snicker,
     And in short, I was afraid.

     And would it have been worth it, after all,
     After the cups, the marmalade, the tea,
     Among the porcelain, among some talk of you and me,
     Would it have been worth while,
     To have bitten off the matter with a smile,
     To have squeezed the universe into a ball
     To roll it toward some overwhelming question,
     To say: "I am Lazarus, come from the dead,
     Come back to tell you all, I shall tell you all"--
     If one, settling a pillow by her head,
       Should say: "That is not what I meant at all;
       That is not it, at all."

     And would it have been worth it, after all,
     Would it have been worth while,
     After the sunsets and the dooryards and the sprinkled streets,
     After the novels, after the teacups, after the skirts that trail along the
         floor--
     And this, and so much more?--
     It is impossible to say just what I mean!
     But as if a magic lantern threw the nerves in patterns on a screen:
     Would it have been worth while
     If one, settling a  pillow or throwing off a shawl,
     And turning toward the window, should say:
       "That is not it at all,
       That is not what I meant, at all."
     No! I am not Prince Hamlet, nor was meant to be;
     Am an attendant lord, one that will do
     To swell a progress, start a scene or two,
     Advise the prince; no doubt, an easy tool,
     Deferential, glad to be of use,
     Politic, cautious, and meticulous;
     Full of high sentence, but a bit obtuse;
     At times, indeed, almost ridiculous--
     Almost, at times, the Fool.

     I grow old... I grow old...
     I shall wear the bottoms of my trousers rolled.

     Shall I part my hair behind? Do I dare to eat a peach?
     I shall wear white flannel trousers, and walk upon the beach.
     I have heard the mermaids singing, each to each.

     I do not think that they will sing to me.

     I have seen them riding seaward on the waves
     Combing the white hair of the waves blown back
     When the wind blows the water white and black.

     We have lingered in the chambers of the sea
     By sea-girls wreathed with seaweed red and brown
     Till human voices wake us, and we drown.





       Thou hast committed--
       Fornication: but that was in another country
       And besides, the wench is dead.
       The Jew of Malta.



     Among the smoke and fog of a December afternoon
     You have the scene arrange itself--as it will seem to do--
     With "I have saved this afternoon for you";
     And four wax candles in the darkened room,
     Four rings of light upon the ceiling overhead,
     An atmosphere of Juliet's tomb
     Prepared for all the things to be said, or left unsaid.
     We have been, let us say, to hear the latest Pole
     Transmit the Preludes, through his hair and finger-tips.
     "So intimate, this Chopin, that I think his soul
     Should be resurrected only among friends
     Some two or three, who will not touch the bloom
     That is rubbed and questioned in the concert room."
     --And so the conversation slips
     Among velleities and carefully caught regrets
     Through attenuated tones of violins
     Mingled with remote cornets
     And begins.

     "You do not know how much they mean to me, my friends,
     And how, how rare and strange it is, to find
     In a life composed so much, so much of odds and ends,
     (For indeed I do not love it... you knew? you are not blind!
     How keen you are!)
     To find a friend who has these qualities,
     Who has, and gives
     Those qualities upon which friendship lives.
     How much it means that I say this to you--
     Without these friendships--life, what cauchemar!"
     Among the windings of the violins
     And the ariettes
     Of cracked cornets
     Inside my brain a dull tom-tom begins
     Absurdly hammering a prelude of its own,
     Capricious monotone
     That is at least one definite "false note."
     --Let us take the air, in a tobacco trance,
     Admire the monuments
     Discuss the late events,
     Correct our watches by the public clocks.
     Then sit for half an hour and drink our bocks.

     Now that lilacs are in bloom
     She has a bowl of lilacs in her room
     And twists one in her fingers while she talks.
     "Ah, my friend, you do not know, you do not know
     What life is, you should hold it in your hands";
     (Slowly twisting the lilac stalks)
     "You let it flow from you, you let it flow,
     And youth is cruel, and has no remorse
     And smiles at situations which it cannot see."
     I smile, of course,
     And go on drinking tea.
     "Yet with these April sunsets, that somehow recall
     My buried life, and Paris in the Spring,
     I feel immeasurably at peace, and find the world
     To be wonderful and youthful, after all."

     The voice returns like the insistent out-of-tune
     Of a broken violin on an August afternoon:
     "I am always sure that you understand
     My feelings, always sure that you feel,
     Sure that across the gulf you reach your hand.

     You are invulnerable, you have no Achilles' heel.
     You will go on, and when you have prevailed
     You can say: at this point many a one has failed.

     But what have I, but what have I, my friend,
     To give you, what can you receive from me?
     Only the friendship and the sympathy
     Of one about to reach her journey's end.

     I shall sit here, serving tea to friends...."

     I take my hat: how can I make a cowardly amends
     For what she has said to me?
     You will see me any morning in the park
     Reading the comics and the sporting page.
     Particularly I remark An English countess goes upon the stage.
     A Greek was murdered at a Polish dance,
     Another bank defaulter has confessed.
     I keep my countenance, I remain self-possessed
     Except when a street piano, mechanical and tired
     Reiterates some worn-out common song
     With the smell of hyacinths across the garden
     Recalling things that other people have desired.
     Are these ideas right or wrong?


     The October night comes down; returning as before
     Except for a slight sensation of being ill at ease
     I mount the stairs and turn the handle of the door
     And feel as if I had mounted on my hands and knees.

     "And so you are going abroad; and when do you return?
     But that's a useless question.
     You hardly know when you are coming back,
     You will find so much to learn."
     My smile falls heavily among the bric-à-brac.

     "Perhaps you can write to me."
     My self-possession flares up for a second;
     This is as I had reckoned.

     "I have been wondering frequently of late
     (But our beginnings never know our ends!)
     Why we have not developed into friends."
     I feel like one who smiles, and turning shall remark
     Suddenly, his expression in a glass.
     My self-possession gutters; we are really in the dark.

     "For everybody said so, all our friends,
     They all were sure our feelings would relate
     So closely! I myself can hardly understand.
     We must leave it now to fate.
     You will write, at any rate.
     Perhaps it is not too late.
     I shall sit here, serving tea to friends."

     And I must borrow every changing shape
     To find expression... dance, dance
     Like a dancing bear,
     Cry like a parrot, chatter like an ape.
     Let us take the air, in a tobacco trance--
     Well! and what if she should die some afternoon,
     Afternoon grey and smoky, evening yellow and rose;
     Should die and leave me sitting pen in hand
     With the smoke coming down above the housetops;
     Doubtful, for quite a while
     Not knowing what to feel or if I understand
     Or whether wise or foolish, tardy or too soon...
     Would she not have the advantage, after all?
     This music is successful with a "dying fall"
     Now that we talk of dying--
     And should I have the right to smile?





     The winter evening settles down
     With smell of steaks in passageways.
     Six o'clock.
     The burnt-out ends of smoky days.
     And now a gusty shower wraps
     The grimy scraps
     Of withered leaves about your feet
     And newspapers from vacant lots;
     The showers beat
     On broken blinds and chimney-pots,
     And at the corner of the street
     A lonely cab-horse steams and stamps.
     And then the lighting of the lamps.


     The morning comes to consciousness
     Of faint stale smells of beer
     From the sawdust-trampled street
     With all its muddy feet that press
     To early coffee-stands.

     With the other masquerades
     That time resumes,
     One thinks of all the hands
     That are raising dingy shades
     In a thousand furnished rooms.


     You tossed a blanket from the bed,
     You lay upon your back, and waited;
     You dozed, and watched the night revealing
     The thousand sordid images
     Of which your soul was constituted;
     They flickered against the ceiling.
     And when all the world came back
     And the light crept up between the shutters,
     And you heard the sparrows in the gutters,
     You had such a vision of the street
     As the street hardly understands;
     Sitting along the bed's edge, where
     You curled the papers from your hair,
     Or clasped the yellow soles of feet
     In the palms of both soiled hands.


     His soul stretched tight across the skies
     That fade behind a city block,
     Or trampled by insistent feet
     At four and five and six o'clock;
     And short square fingers stuffing pipes,
     And evening newspapers, and eyes
     Assured of certain certainties,
     The conscience of a blackened street
     Impatient to assume the world.

     I am moved by fancies that are curled
     Around these images, and cling:
     The notion of some infinitely gentle
     Infinitely suffering thing.

     Wipe your hand across your mouth, and laugh;
     The worlds revolve like ancient women
     Gathering fuel in vacant lots.





     Twelve o'clock.
     Along the reaches of the street
     Held in a lunar synthesis,
     Whispering lunar incantations
     Disolve the floors of memory
     And all its clear relations,
     Its divisions and precisions,
     Every street lamp that I pass
     Beats like a fatalistic drum,
     And through the spaces of the dark
     Midnight shakes the memory
     As a madman shakes a dead geranium.

     Half-past one,
     The street lamp sputtered,
     The street lamp muttered,
     The street lamp said,
     "Regard that woman
     Who hesitates toward you in the light of the door
     Which opens on her like a grin.
     You see the border of her dress
     Is torn and stained with sand,
     And you see the corner of her eye
     Twists like a crooked pin."

     The memory throws up high and dry
     A crowd of twisted things;
     A twisted branch upon the beach
     Eaten smooth, and polished
     As if the world gave up
     The secret of its skeleton,
     Stiff and white.
     A broken spring in a factory yard,
     Rust that clings to the form that the strength has left
     Hard and curled and ready to snap.

     Half-past two,
     The street-lamp said,
     "Remark the cat which flattens itself in the gutter,
     Slips out its tongue
     And devours a morsel of rancid butter."
     So the hand of the child, automatic,
     Slipped out and pocketed a toy that was running along
     the quay.
     I could see nothing behind that child's eye.
     I have seen eyes in the street
     Trying to peer through lighted shutters,
     And a crab one afternoon in a pool,
     An old crab with barnacles on his back,
     Gripped the end of a stick which I held him.

     Half-past three,
     The lamp sputtered,
     The lamp muttered in the dark.

     The lamp hummed:
     "Regard the moon,
     La lune ne garde aucune rancune,
     She winks a feeble eye,
     She smiles into corners.
     She smooths the hair of the grass.
     The moon has lost her memory.
     A washed-out smallpox cracks her face,
     Her hand twists a paper rose,
     That smells of dust and old Cologne,
     She is alone With all the old nocturnal smells
     That cross and cross across her brain.
     The reminiscence comes
     Of sunless dry geraniums
     And dust in crevices,
     Smells of chestnuts in the streets
     And female smells in shuttered rooms
     And cigarettes in corridors
     And cocktail smells in bars."

     The lamp said,
     "Four o'clock,
     Here is the number on the door.
     Memory!
     You have the key,
     The little lamp spreads a ring on the stair,
     Mount.
     The bed is open; the tooth-brush hangs on the wall,
     Put your shoes at the door, sleep, prepare for life."

     The last twist of the knife.





     They are rattling breakfast plates in basement kitchens,
     And along the trampled edges of the street
     I am aware of the damp souls of housemaids
     Sprouting despondently at area gates.
     The brown waves of fog toss up to me
     Twisted faces from the bottom of the street,
     And tear from a passer-by with muddy skirts
     An aimless smile that hovers in the air
     And vanishes along the level of the roofs.





     The readers of the Boston Evening Transcript
     Sway in the wind like a field of ripe corn.
     When evening quickens faintly in the street,
     Wakening the appetites of life in some
     And to others bringing the Boston Evening Transcript,
     I mount the steps and ring the bell, turning
     Wearily, as one would turn to nod good-bye to Rochefoucauld,
     If the street were time and he at the end of the street,
     And I say, "Cousin Harriet, here is the Boston Evening Transcript."





     Miss Helen Slingsby was my maiden aunt,
     And lived in a small house near a fashionable square
     Cared for by servants to the number of four.
     Now when she died there was silence in heaven
     And silence at her end of the street.
     The shutters were drawn and the undertaker wiped his feet--
     He was aware that this sort of thing had occurred before.
     The dogs were handsomely provided for,
     But shortly afterwards the parrot died too.
     The Dresden clock continued ticking on the mantelpiece,
     And the footman sat upon the dining-table
     Holding the second housemaid on his knees--
     Who had always been so careful while her mistress lived.





     Miss Nancy Ellicott Strode across the hills and broke them,
     Rode across the hills and broke them--
     The barren New England hills--
     Riding to hounds
     Over the cow-pasture.

     Miss Nancy Ellicott smoked
     And danced all the modern dances;
     And her aunts were not quite sure how they felt about it,
     But they knew that it was modern.

     Upon the glazen shelves kept watch
     Matthew and Waldo, guardians of the faith,
     The army of unalterable law.





     When Mr. Apollinax visited the United States
     His laughter tinkled among the teacups.
     I thought of Fragilion, that shy figure among the birch-trees,
     And of Priapus in the shrubbery
     Gaping at the lady in the swing.
     In the palace of Mrs. Phlaccus, at Professor Channing-Cheetah's
     He laughed like an irresponsible foetus.
     HWith your aid indiffeis laughter was submarine and profound
     Like the old man of the sea's
     Hidden under coral islands
     Where worried bodies of drowned men drift down in the green silence,
     Dropping from fingers of surf.
     I looked for the head of Mr. Apollinax rolling under a chair
     Or grinning over a screen
     With seaweed in its hair.
     I heard the beat of centaur's hoofs over the hard turf
     As his dry and passionate talk devoured the afternoon.
     "He is a charming man"--"But after all what did he mean?"--
     "His pointed ears... He must be unbalanced,"--
     "There was something he said that I might have challenged."
     Of dowager Mrs. Phlaccus, and Professor and Mrs. Cheetah
     I remember a slice of lemon, and a bitten macaroon.





     As she laughed I was aware of becoming involved in her
     laughter and being part of it, until her teeth were
     only accidental stars with a talent for squad-drill. I
     was drawn in by short gasps, inhaled at each momentary
     recovery, lost finally in the dark caverns of her
     throat, bruised by the ripple of unseen muscles. An
     elderly waiter with trembling hands was hurriedly
     spreading a pink and white checked cloth over the rusty
     green iron table, saying: "If the lady and gentleman
     wish to take their tea in the garden, if the lady and
     gentleman wish to take their tea in the garden..." I
     decided that if the shaking of her breasts could be
     stopped, some of the fragments of the afternoon might
     be collected, and I concentrated my attention with
     careful subtlety to this end.





     I observe: "Our sentimental friend the moon!
     Or possibly (fantastic, I confess)
     It may be Prester John's balloon
     Or an old battered lantern hung aloft
     To light poor travellers to their distress."
       She then: "How you digress!"

     And I then: "Some one frames upon the keys
     That exquisite nocturne, with which we explain
     The night and moonshine; music which we seize
     To body forth our vacuity."
       She then: "Does this refer to me?"
       "Oh no, it is I who am inane."

     "You, madam, are the eternal humorist,
     The eternal enemy of the absolute,
     Giving our vagrant moods the slightest twist!
     With your air indifferent and imperious
     At a stroke our mad poetics to confute--"
       And--"Are we then so serious?"






     Stand on the highest pavement of the stair--
     Lean on a garden urn--
     Weave, weave the sunlight in your hair--
     Clasp your flowers to you with a pained surprise--
     Fling them to the ground and turn
     With a fugitive resentment in your eyes:
     But weave, weave the sunlight in your hair.

     So I would have had him leave,
     So I would have had her stand and grieve,
     So he would have left
     As the soul leaves the body torn and bruised,
     As the mind deserts the body it has used.
     I should find
     Some way incomparably light and deft,
     Some way we both should understand,
     Simple and faithless as a smile and shake of the hand.

     She turned away, but with the autumn weather
     Compelled my imagination many days,
     Many days and many hours:
     Her hair over her arms and her arms full of flowers.
     And I wonder how they should have been together!
     I should have lost a gesture and a pose.
     Sometimes these cogitations still amaze
     The troubled midnight and the noon's repose.




I stood tip-toe upon a little hill,
The air was cooling, and so very still.
That the sweet buds which with a modest pride
Pull droopingly, in slanting curve aside,
Their scantly leaved, and finely tapering stems,
Had not yet lost those starry diadems
Caught from the early sobbing of the morn.
The clouds were pure and white as flocks new shorn,
And fresh from the clear brook; sweetly they slept
On the blue fields of heaven, and then there crept
A little noiseless noise among the leaves,
Born of the very sigh that silence heaves:
For not the faintest motion could be seen
Of all the shades that slanted o'er the green.
There was wide wand'ring for the greediest eye,
To peer about upon variety;
Far round the horizon's crystal air to skim,
And trace the dwindled edgings of its brim;
To picture out the quaint, and curious bending
Of a fresh woodland alley, never ending;
Or by the bowery clefts, and leafy shelves,
Guess were the jaunty streams refresh themselves.
I gazed awhile, and felt as light, and free
As though the fanning wings of Mercury
Had played upon my heels: I was light-hearted,
And many pleasures to my vision started;
So I straightway began to pluck a posey
Of luxuries bright, milky, soft and rosy.

A bush of May flowers with the bees about them;
Ah, sure no tasteful nook would be without them;
And let a lush laburnum oversweep them,
And let long grass grow round the roots to keep them
Moist, cool and green; and shade the violets,
That they may bind the moss in leafy nets.

A filbert hedge with wild briar overtwined,
And clumps of woodbine taking the soft wind
Upon their summer thrones; there too should be
The frequent chequer of a youngling tree,
That with a score of light green brethen shoots
From the quaint mossiness of aged roots:
Round which is heard a spring-head of clear waters
Babbling so wildly of its lovely daughters
The spreading blue bells: it may haply mourn
That such fair clusters should be rudely torn
From their fresh beds, and scattered thoughtlessly
By infant hands, left on the path to die.

Open afresh your round of starry folds,
Ye ardent marigolds!
Dry up the moisture from your golden lids,
For great Apollo bids
That in these days your praises should be sung
On many harps, which he has lately strung;
And when again your dewiness he kisses,
Tell him, I have you in my world of blisses:
So haply when I rove in some far vale,
His mighty voice may come upon the gale.

Here are sweet peas, on tip-toe for a flight:
With wings of gentle flush o'er delicate white,
And taper fulgent catching at all things,
To bind them all about with tiny rings.

Linger awhile upon some bending planks
That lean against a streamlet's rushy banks,
And watch intently Nature's gentle doings:
They will be found softer than ring-dove's cooings.
How silent comes the water round that bend;
Not the minutest whisper does it send
To the o'erhanging sallows: blades of grass
Slowly across the chequer'd shadows pass.
Why, you might read two sonnets, ere they reach
To where the hurrying freshnesses aye preach
A natural sermon o'er their pebbly beds;
Where swarms of minnows show their little heads,
Staying their wavy bodies 'gainst the streams,
To taste the luxury of sunny beams
Temper'd with coolness. How they ever wrestle
With their own sweet delight, and ever nestle
Their silver bellies on the pebbly sand.
If you but scantily hold out the hand,
That very instant not one will remain;
But turn your eye, and they are there again.
The ripples seem right glad to reach those cresses,
And cool themselves among the em'rald tresses;
The while they cool themselves, they freshness give,
And moisture, that the bowery green may live:
So keeping up an interchange of favours,
Like good men in the truth of their behaviours
Sometimes goldfinches one by one will drop
From low hung branches; little space they stop;
But sip, and twitter, and their feathers sleek;
Then off at once, as in a wanton freak:
Or perhaps, to show their black, and golden wings,
Pausing upon their yellow flutterings.
Were I in such a place, I sure should pray
That nought less sweet, might call my thoughts away,
Than the soft rustle of a maiden's gown
Fanning away the dandelion's down;
Than the light music of her nimble toes
Patting against the sorrel as she goes.
How she would start, and blush, thus to be caught
Playing in all her innocence of thought.
O let me lead her gently o'er the brook,
Watch her half-smiling lips, and downward look;
O let me for one moment touch her wrist;
Let me one moment to her breathing list;
And as she leaves me may she often turn
Her fair eyes looking through her locks auburne.
What next? A tuft of evening primroses,
O'er which the mind may hover till it dozes;
O'er which it well might take a pleasant sleep,
But that 'tis ever startled by the leap
Of buds into ripe flowers; or by the flitting
Of diverse moths, that aye their rest are quitting;
Or by the moon lifting her silver rim
Above a cloud, and with a gradual swim
Coming into the blue with all her light.
O Maker of sweet poets, dear delight
Of this fair world, and all its gentle livers;
Spangler of clouds, halo of crystal rivers,
Mingler with leaves, and dew and tumbling streams,
Closer of lovely eyes to lovely dreams,
Lover of loneliness, and wandering,
Of upcast eye, and tender pondering!
Thee must I praise above all other glories
That smile us on to tell delightful stories.
For what has made the sage or poet write
But the fair paradise of Nature's light?
In the calm grandeur of a sober line,
We see the waving of the mountain pine;
And when a tale is beautifully staid,
We feel the safety of a hawthorn glade:
When it is moving on luxurious wings,
The soul is lost in pleasant smotherings:
Fair dewy roses brush against our faces,
And flowering laurels spring from diamond vases;
O'er head we see the jasmine and sweet briar,
And bloomy grapes laughing from green attire;
While at our feet, the voice of crystal bubbles
Charms us at once away from all our troubles:
So that we feel uplifted from the world,
Walking upon the white clouds wreath'd and curl'd.
So felt he, who first told, how Psyche went
On the smooth wind to realms of wonderment;
What Psyche felt, and Love, when their full lips
First touch'd; what amorous, and fondling nips
They gave each other's cheeks; with all their sighs,
And how they kist each other's tremulous eyes:
The silver lamp,--the ravishment,--the wonder--
The darkness,--loneliness,--the fearful thunder;
Their woes gone by, and both to heaven upflown,
To bow for gratitude before Jove's throne.
So did he feel, who pull'd the boughs aside,
That we might look into a forest wide,
To catch a glimpse of Fawns, and Dryades
Coming with softest rustle through the trees;
And garlands woven of flowers wild, and sweet,
Upheld on ivory wrists, or sporting feet:
Telling us how fair, trembling Syrinx fled
Arcadian Pan, with such a fearful dread.
Poor nymph,--poor Pan,--how he did weep to find,
Nought but a lovely sighing of the wind
Along the reedy stream; a half heard strain,
Full of sweet desolation--balmy pain.

What first inspired a bard of old to sing
Narcissus pining o'er the untainted spring?
In some delicious ramble, he had found
A little space, with boughs all woven round;
And in the midst of all, a clearer pool
Than e'er reflected in its pleasant cool,
The blue sky here, and there, serenely peeping
Through tendril wreaths fantastically creeping.
And on the bank a lonely flower he spied,
A meek and forlorn flower, with naught of pride,
Drooping its beauty o'er the watery clearness,
To woo its own sad image into nearness:
Deaf to light Zephyrus it would not move;
But still would seem to droop, to pine, to love.
So while the Poet stood in this sweet spot,
Some fainter gleamings o'er his fancy shot;
Nor was it long ere he had told the tale
Of young Narcissus, and sad Echo's bale.

Where had he been, from whose warm head out-flew
That sweetest of all songs, that ever new,
That aye refreshing, pure deliciousness,
Coming ever to bless
The wanderer by moonlight? to him bringing
Shapes from the invisible world, unearthly singing
From out the middle air, from flowery nests,
And from the pillowy silkiness that rests
Full in the speculation of the stars.
Ah! surely he had burst our mortal bars;
Into some wond'rous region he had gone,
To search for thee, divine Endymion!

He was a Poet, sure a lover too,
Who stood on Latmus' top, what time there blew
Soft breezes from the myrtle vale below;
And brought in faintness solemn, sweet, and slow
A hymn from Dian's temple; while upswelling,
The incense went to her own starry dwelling.
But though her face was clear as infant's eyes,
Though she stood smiling o'er the sacrifice,
The Poet wept at her so piteous fate,
Wept that such beauty should be desolate:
So in fine wrath some golden sounds he won,
And gave meek Cynthia her Endymion.

Queen of the wide air; thou most lovely queen
Of all the brightness that mine eyes have seen!
As thou exceedest all things in thy shine,
So every tale, does this sweet tale of thine.
O for three words of honey, that I might
Tell but one wonder of thy bridal night!

Where distant ships do seem to show their keels,
Phoebus awhile delayed his mighty wheels,
And turned to smile upon thy bashful eyes,
Ere he his unseen pomp would solemnize.
The evening weather was so bright, and clear,
That men of health were of unusual cheer;
Stepping like Homer at the trumpet's call,
Or young Apollo on the pedestal:
And lovely women were as fair and warm,
As Venus looking sideways in alarm.
The breezes were ethereal, and pure,
And crept through half closed lattices to cure
The languid sick; it cool'd their fever'd sleep,
And soothed them into slumbers full and deep.
Soon they awoke clear eyed: nor burnt with thirsting,
Nor with hot fingers, nor with temples bursting:
And springing up, they met the wond'ring sight
Of their dear friends, nigh foolish with delight;
Who feel their arms, and breasts, and kiss and stare,
And on their placid foreheads part the hair.
Young men, and maidens at each other gaz'd
With hands held back, and motionless, amaz'd
To see the brightness in each others' eyes;
And so they stood, fill'd with a sweet surprise,
Until their tongues were loos'd in poesy.
Therefore no lover did of anguish die:
But the soft numbers, in that moment spoken,
Made silken ties, that never may be broken.
Cynthia! I cannot tell the greater blisses,
That follow'd thine, and thy dear shepherd's kisses:
Was there a Poet born?--but now no more,
My wand'ring spirit must no further soar.--






Lo! I must tell a tale of chivalry;
For large white plumes are dancing in mine eye.
Not like the formal crest of latter days:
But bending in a thousand graceful ways;
So graceful, that it seems no mortal hand,
Or e'en the touch of Archimago's wand,
Could charm them into such an attitude.
We must think rather, that in playful mood,
Some mountain breeze had turned its chief delight,
To show this wonder of its gentle might.
Lo! I must tell a tale of chivalry;
For while I muse, the lance points slantingly
Athwart the morning air: some lady sweet,
Who cannot feel for cold her tender feet,
From the worn top of some old battlement
Hails it with tears, her stout defender sent:
And from her own pure self no joy dissembling,
Wraps round her ample robe with happy trembling.
Sometimes, when the good Knight his rest would take,
It is reflected, clearly, in a lake,
With the young ashen boughs, 'gainst which it rests,
And th' half seen mossiness of linnets' nests.
Ah! shall I ever tell its cruelty,
When the fire flashes from a warrior's eye,
And his tremendous hand is grasping it,
And his dark brow for very wrath is knit?
Or when his spirit, with more calm intent,
Leaps to the honors of a tournament,
And makes the gazers round about the ring
Stare at the grandeur of the balancing?
No, no! this is far off:--then how shall I
Revive the dying tones of minstrelsy,
Which linger yet about lone gothic arches,
In dark green ivy, and among wild larches?
How sing the splendour of the revelries,
When buts of wine are drunk off to the lees?
And that bright lance, against the fretted wall,
Beneath the shade of stately banneral,
Is slung with shining cuirass, sword, and shield?
Where ye may see a spur in bloody field.
Light-footed damsels move with gentle paces
Round the wide hall, and show their happy faces;
Or stand in courtly talk by fives and sevens:
Like those fair stars that twinkle in the heavens.
Yet must I tell a tale of chivalry:
Or wherefore comes that knight so proudly by?
Wherefore more proudly does the gentle knight,
Rein in the swelling of his ample might?

Spenser! thy brows are arched, open, kind,
And come like a clear sun-rise to my mind;
And always does my heart with pleasure dance,
When I think on thy noble countenance:
Where never yet was ought more earthly seen
Than the pure freshness of thy laurels green.
Therefore, great bard, I not so fearfully
Call on thy gentle spirit to hover nigh
My daring steps: or if thy tender care,
Thus startled unaware,
Be jealous that the foot of other wight
Should madly follow that bright path of light
Trac'd by thy lov'd Libertas; he will speak,
And tell thee that my prayer is very meek;
That I will follow with due reverence,
And start with awe at mine own strange pretence.
Him thou wilt hear; so I will rest in hope
To see wide plains, fair trees and lawny slope:
The morn, the eve, the light, the shade, the flowers:
Clear streams, smooth lakes, and overlooking towers.






Young Calidore is paddling o'er the lake;
His healthful spirit eager and awake
To feel the beauty of a silent eve,
Which seem'd full loath this happy world to leave;
The light dwelt o'er the scene so lingeringly.
He bares his forehead to the cool blue sky,
And smiles at the far clearness all around,
Until his heart is well nigh over wound,
And turns for calmness to the pleasant green
Of easy slopes, and shadowy trees that lean
So elegantly o'er the waters' brim
And show their blossoms trim.
Scarce can his clear and nimble eye-sight follow
The freaks, and dartings of the black-wing'd swallow,
Delighting much, to see it half at rest,
Dip so refreshingly its wings, and breast
'Gainst the smooth surface, and to mark anon,
The widening circles into nothing gone.

And now the sharp keel of his little boat
Comes up with ripple, and with easy float,
And glides into a bed of water lillies:
Broad leav'd are they and their white canopies
Are upward turn'd to catch the heavens' dew.
Near to a little island's point they grew;
Whence Calidore might have the goodliest view
Of this sweet spot of earth. The bowery shore
Went off in gentle windings to the hoar
And light blue mountains: but no breathing man
With a warm heart, and eye prepared to scan
Nature's clear beauty, could pass lightly by
Objects that look'd out so invitingly
On either side. These, gentle Calidore
Greeted, as he had known them long before.

The sidelong view of swelling leafiness,
Which the glad setting sun, in gold doth dress;
Whence ever, and anon the jay outsprings,
And scales upon the beauty of its wings.

The lonely turret, shatter'd, and outworn,
Stands venerably proud; too proud to mourn
Its long lost grandeur: fir trees grow around,
Aye dropping their hard fruit upon the ground.

The little chapel with the cross above
Upholding wreaths of ivy; the white dove,
That on the windows spreads his feathers light,
And seems from purple clouds to wing its flight.

Green tufted islands casting their soft shades
Across the lake; sequester'd leafy glades,
That through the dimness of their twilight show
Large dock leaves, spiral foxgloves, or the glow
Of the wild cat's eyes, or the silvery stems
Of delicate birch trees, or long grass which hems
A little brook. The youth had long been viewing
These pleasant things, and heaven was bedewing
The mountain flowers, when his glad senses caught
A trumpet's silver voice. Ah! it was fraught
With many joys for him: the warder's ken
Had found white coursers prancing in the glen:
Friends very dear to him he soon will see;
So pushes off his boat most eagerly,
And soon upon the lake he skims along,
Deaf to the nightingale's first under-song;
Nor minds he the white swans that dream so sweetly:
His spirit flies before him so completely.

And now he turns a jutting point of land,
Whence may be seen the castle gloomy, and grand:
Nor will a bee buzz round two swelling peaches,
Before the point of his light shallop reaches
Those marble steps that through the water dip:
Now over them he goes with hasty trip,
And scarcely stays to ope the folding doors:
Anon he leaps along the oaken floors
Of halls and corridors.

Delicious sounds! those little bright-eyed things
That float about the air on azure wings,
Had been less heartfelt by him than the clang
Of clattering hoofs; into the court he sprang,
Just as two noble steeds, and palfreys twain,
Were slanting out their necks with loosened rein;
While from beneath the threat'ning portcullis
They brought their happy burthens. What a kiss,
What gentle squeeze he gave each lady's hand!
How tremblingly their delicate ancles spann'd!
Into how sweet a trance his soul was gone,
While whisperings of affection
Made him delay to let their tender feet
Come to the earth; with an incline so sweet
From their low palfreys o'er his neck they bent:
And whether there were tears of languishment,
Or that the evening dew had pearl'd their tresses,
He feels a moisture on his cheek, and blesses
With lips that tremble, and with glistening eye
All the soft luxury
That nestled in his arms. A dimpled hand,
Fair as some wonder out of fairy land,
Hung from his shoulder like the drooping flowers
Of whitest Cassia, fresh from summer showers:
And this he fondled with his happy cheek
As if for joy he would no further seek;
When the kind voice of good Sir Clerimond
Came to his ear, like something from beyond
His present being: so he gently drew
His warm arms, thrilling now with pulses new,
From their sweet thrall, and forward gently bending,
Thank'd heaven that his joy was never ending;
While 'gainst his forehead he devoutly press'd
A hand heaven made to succour the distress'd;
A hand that from the world's bleak promontory
Had lifted Calidore for deeds of glory.

Amid the pages, and the torches' glare,
There stood a knight, patting the flowing hair
Of his proud horse's mane: he was withal
A man of elegance, and stature tall:
So that the waving of his plumes would be
High as the berries of a wild ash tree,
Or as the winged cap of Mercury.
His armour was so dexterously wrought
In shape, that sure no living man had thought
It hard, and heavy steel: but that indeed
It was some glorious form, some splendid weed,
In which a spirit new come from the skies
Might live, and show itself to human eyes.
'Tis the far-fam'd, the brave Sir Gondibert,
Said the good man to Calidore alert;
While the young warrior with a step of grace
Came up,--a courtly smile upon his face,
And mailed hand held out, ready to greet
The large-eyed wonder, and ambitious heat
Of the aspiring boy; who as he led
Those smiling ladies, often turned his head
To admire the visor arched so gracefully
Over a knightly brow; while they went by
The lamps that from the high-roof'd hall were pendent,
And gave the steel a shining quite transcendent.

Soon in a pleasant chamber they are seated;
The sweet-lipp'd ladies have already greeted
All the green leaves that round the window clamber,
To show their purple stars, and bells of amber.
Sir Gondibert has doff'd his shining steel,
Gladdening in the free, and airy feel
Of a light mantle; and while Clerimond
Is looking round about him with a fond,
And placid eye, young Calidore is burning
To hear of knightly deeds, and gallant spurning
Of all unworthiness; and how the strong of arm
Kept off dismay, and terror, and alarm
From lovely woman: while brimful of this,
He gave each damsel's hand so warm a kiss,
And had such manly ardour in his eye,
That each at other look'd half staringly;
And then their features started into smiles
Sweet as blue heavens o'er enchanted isles.

Softly the breezes from the forest came,
Softly they blew aside the taper's flame;
Clear was the song from Philomel's far bower;
Grateful the incense from the lime-tree flower;
Mysterious, wild, the far heard trumpet's tone;
Lovely the moon in ether, all alone:
Sweet too the converse of these happy mortals,
As that of busy spirits when the portals
Are closing in the west; or that soft humming
We hear around when Hesperus is coming.
Sweet be their sleep.






What though while the wonders of nature exploring,
  I cannot your light, mazy footsteps attend;
Nor listen to accents, that almost adoring,
  Bless Cynthia's face, the enthusiast's friend:

Yet over the steep, whence the mountain stream rushes,
  With you, kindest friends, in idea I rove;
Mark the clear tumbling crystal, its passionate gushes,
  Its spray that the wild flower kindly bedews.

Why linger you so, the wild labyrinth strolling?
  Why breathless, unable your bliss to declare?
Ah! you list to the nightingale's tender condoling,
  Responsive to sylphs, in the moon beamy air.

'Tis morn, and the flowers with dew are yet drooping,
  I see you are treading the verge of the sea:
And now! ah, I see it--you just now are stooping
  To pick up the keep-sake intended for me.

If a cherub, on pinions of silver descending,
  Had brought me a gem from the fret-work of heaven;
And smiles, with his star-cheering voice sweetly blending,
  The blessings of Tighe had melodiously given;

It had not created a warmer emotion
  Than the present, fair nymphs, I was blest with from you,
Than the shell, from the bright golden sands of the ocean
  Which the emerald waves at your feet gladly threw.

For, indeed, 'tis a sweet and peculiar pleasure,
  (And blissful is he who such happiness finds,)
To possess but a span of the hour of leisure,
  In elegant, pure, and aerial minds.






Hast thou from the caves of Golconda, a gem
  Pure as the ice-drop that froze on the mountain?
Bright as the humming-bird's green diadem,
  When it flutters in sun-beams that shine through a fountain?

Hast thou a goblet for dark sparkling wine?
  That goblet right heavy, and massy, and gold?
And splendidly mark'd with the story divine
  Of Armida the fair, and Rinaldo the bold?

Hast thou a steed with a mane richly flowing?
  Hast thou a sword that thine enemy's smart is?
Hast thou a trumpet rich melodies blowing?
  And wear'st thou the shield of the fam'd Britomartis?

What is it that hangs from thy shoulder, so brave,
  Embroidered with many a spring peering flower?
Is it a scarf that thy fair lady gave?
  And hastest thou now to that fair lady's bower?

Ah! courteous Sir Knight, with large joy thou art crown'd;
  Full many the glories that brighten thy youth!
I will tell thee my blisses, which richly abound
  In magical powers to bless, and to sooth.

On this scroll thou seest written in characters fair
  A sun-beamy tale of a wreath, and a chain;
And, warrior, it nurtures the property rare
  Of charming my mind from the trammels of pain.

This canopy mark: 'tis the work of a fay;
  Beneath its rich shade did King Oberon languish,
When lovely Titania was far, far away,
  And cruelly left him to sorrow, and anguish.

There, oft would he bring from his soft sighing lute
  Wild strains to which, spell-bound, the nightingales listened;
The wondering spirits of heaven were mute,
  And tears 'mong the dewdrops of morning oft glistened.

In this little dome, all those melodies strange,
  Soft, plaintive, and melting, for ever will sigh;
Nor e'er will the notes from their tenderness change;
  Nor e'er will the music of Oberon die.

So, when I am in a voluptuous vein,
  I pillow my head on the sweets of the rose,
And list to the tale of the wreath, and the chain,
  Till its echoes depart; then I sink to repose.

Adieu, valiant Eric! with joy thou art crown'd;
  Full many the glories that brighten thy youth,
I too have my blisses, which richly abound
  In magical powers, to bless and to sooth.






Hadst thou liv'd in days of old,
O what wonders had been told
Of thy lively countenance,
And thy humid eyes that dance
In the  midst of their own brightness;
In the very fane of lightness.
Over which thine eyebrows, leaning,
Picture out each lovely meaning:
In a dainty bend they lie,
Like two streaks across the sky,
Or the feathers from a crow,
Fallen on a bed of snow.
Of thy dark hair that extends
Into many graceful bends:
As the leaves of Hellebore
Turn to whence they sprung before.
And behind each ample curl
Peeps the richness of a pearl.
Downward too flows many a tress
With a glossy waviness;
Full, and round like globes that rise
From the censer to the skies
Through sunny air. Add too, the sweetness
Of thy honied voice; the neatness
Of thine ankle lightly turn'd:
With those beauties, scarce discrn'd,
Kept with such sweet privacy,
That they seldom meet the eye
Of the little loves that fly
Round about with eager pry.
Saving when, with freshening lave,
Thou dipp'st them in the taintless wave;
Like twin water lillies, born
In the coolness of the morn.
O, if thou hadst breathed then,
Now the Muses had been ten.
Couldst thou wish for lineage higher
Than twin sister of Thalia?
At least for ever, evermore,
Will I call the Graces four.

Hadst thou liv'd when chivalry
Lifted up her lance on high,
Tell me what thou wouldst have been?
Ah! I see the silver sheen
Of thy broidered, floating vest
Cov'ring half thine ivory breast;
Which, O heavens! I should see,
But that cruel destiny
Has placed a golden cuirass there;
Keeping secret what is fair.
Like sunbeams in a cloudlet nested
Thy locks in knightly casque are rested:
O'er which bend four milky plumes
Like the gentle lilly's blooms
Springing from a costly vase.
See with what a stately pace
Comes thine alabaster steed;
Servant of heroic deed!
O'er his loins, his trappings glow
Like the northern lights on snow.
Mount his back! thy sword unsheath!
Sign of the enchanter's death;
Bane of every wicked spell;
Silencer of dragon's yell.
Alas! thou this wilt never do:
Thou art an enchantress too,
And wilt surely never spill
Blood of those whose eyes can kill.






When by my solitary hearth I sit,
  And hateful thoughts enwrap my soul in gloom;
When no fair dreams before my "mind's eye" flit,
  And the bare heath of life presents no bloom;
    Sweet Hope, ethereal balm upon me shed,
    And wave thy silver pinions o'er my head.

Whene'er I wander, at the fall of night,
  Where woven boughs shut out the moon's bright ray,
Should sad Despondency my musings fright,
  And frown, to drive fair Cheerfulness away,
    Peep with the moon-beams through the leafy roof,
    And keep that fiend Despondence far aloof.

Should Disappointment, parent of Despair,
  Strive for her son to seize my careless heart;
When, like a cloud, he sits upon the air,
  Preparing on his spell-bound prey to dart:
    Chace him away, sweet Hope, with visage bright,
    And fright him as the morning frightens night!

Whene'er the fate of those I hold most dear
  Tells to my fearful breast a tale of sorrow,
O bright-eyed Hope, my morbid fancy cheer;
  Let me awhile thy sweetest comforts borrow:
    Thy heaven-born radiance around me shed,
    And wave thy silver pinions o'er my head!

Should e'er unhappy love my bosom pain,
  From cruel parents, or relentless fair;
O let me think it is not quite in vain
  To sigh out sonnets to the midnight air!
    Sweet Hope, ethereal balm upon me shed.
    And wave thy silver pinions o'er my head!

In the long vista of the years to roll,
  Let me not see our country's honour fade:
O let me see our land retain her soul,
  Her pride, her freedom; and not freedom's shade.
    From thy bright eyes unusual brightness shed--
    Beneath thy pinions canopy my head!

Let me not see the patriot's high bequest,
  Great Liberty! how great in plain attire!
With the base purple of a court oppress'd,
  Bowing her head, and ready to expire:
    But let me see thee stoop from heaven on wings
    That fill the skies with silver glitterings!

And as, in sparkling majesty, a star
  Gilds the bright summit of some gloomy cloud;
Brightening the half veil'd face of heaven afar:
  So, when dark thoughts my boding spirit shroud,
    Sweet Hope, celestial influence round me shed,
    Waving thy silver pinions o'er my head.



  Now Morning from her orient chamber came,
  And her first footsteps touch'd a verdant hill;
  Crowning its lawny crest with amber flame,
  Silv'ring the untainted gushes of its rill;
  Which, pure from mossy beds, did down distill,
  And after parting beds of simple flowers,
  By many streams a little lake did fill,
  Which round its marge reflected woven bowers,
And, in its middle space, a sky that never lowers.

  There the king-fisher saw his plumage bright
  Vieing with fish of brilliant dye below;
  Whose silken fins, and golden scales' light
  Cast upward, through the waves, a ruby glow:
  There saw the swan his neck of arched snow,
  And oar'd himself along with majesty;
  Sparkled his jetty eyes; his feet did show
  Beneath the waves like Afric's ebony,
And on his back a fay reclined voluptuously.

  Ah! could I tell the wonders of an isle
  That in that fairest lake had placed been,
  I could e'en Dido of her grief beguile;
  Or rob from aged Lear his bitter teen:
  For sure so fair a place was never seen,
  Of all that ever charm'd romantic eye:
  It seem'd an emerald in the silver sheen
  Of the bright waters; or as when on high,
Through clouds of fleecy white, laughs the coerulean sky.

  And all around it dipp'd luxuriously
  Slopings of verdure through the glossy tide,
  Which, as it were in gentle amity,
  Rippled delighted up the flowery side;
  As if to glean the ruddy tears, it tried,
  Which fell profusely from the rose-tree stem!
  Haply it was the workings of its pride,
  In strife to throw upon the shore a gem
Outvieing all the buds in Flora's diadem.



Woman! when I behold thee flippant, vain,
  Inconstant, childish, proud, and full of fancies;
  Without that modest softening that enhances
The downcast eye, repentant of the pain
That its mild light creates to heal again:
  E'en then, elate, my spirit leaps, and prances,
  E'en then my soul with exultation dances
For that to love, so long, I've dormant lain:
But when I see thee meek, and kind, and tender,
  Heavens! how desperately do I adore
Thy winning graces;--to be thy defender
  I hotly burn--to be a Calidore--
A very Red Cross Knight--a stout Leander--
  Might I be loved by thee like these of yore.

Light feet, dark violet eyes, and parted hair;
  Soft dimpled hands, white neck, and creamy breast,
  Are things on which the dazzled senses rest
Till the fond, fixed eyes, forget they stare.
From such fine pictures, heavens! I cannot dare
  To turn my admiration, though unpossess'd
  They be of what is worthy,--though not drest
In lovely modesty, and virtues rare.
Yet these I leave as thoughtless as a lark;
  These lures I straight forget,--e'en ere I dine,
Or thrice my palate moisten: but when I mark
  Such charms with mild intelligences shine,
My ear is open like a greedy shark,
  To catch the tunings of a voice divine.

Ah! who can e'er forget so fair a being?
  Who can forget her half retiring sweets?
  God! she is like a milk-white lamb that bleats
For man's protection. Surely the All-seeing,
Who joys to see us with his gifts agreeing,
  Will never give him pinions, who intreats
  Such innocence to ruin,--who vilely cheats
A dove-like bosom. In truth there is no freeing
One's thoughts from such a beauty; when I hear
  A lay that once I saw her hand awake,
Her form seems floating palpable, and near;
  Had I e'er seen her from an arbour take
A dewy flower, oft would that hand appear,
  And o'er my eyes the trembling moisture shake.




Sweet are the pleasures that to verse belong,
And doubly sweet a brotherhood in song;
Nor can remembrance, Mathew! bring to view
A fate more pleasing, a delight more true
Than that in which the brother Poets joy'd,
Who with combined powers, their wit employ'd
To raise a trophy to the drama's muses.
The thought of this great partnership diffuses
Over the genius loving heart, a feeling
Of all that's high, and great, and good, and healing.

Too partial friend! fain would I follow thee
Past each horizon of fine poesy;
Fain would I echo back each pleasant note
As o'er Sicilian seas, clear anthems float
'Mong the light skimming gondolas far parted,
Just when the sun his farewell beam has darted:
But 'tis impossible; far different cares
Beckon me sternly from soft "Lydian airs,"
And hold my faculties so long in thrall,
That I am oft in doubt whether at all
I shall again see Phoebus in the morning:
Or flush'd Aurora in the roseate dawning!
Or a white Naiad in a rippling stream;
Or a rapt seraph in a moonlight beam;
Or again witness what with thee I've seen,
The dew by fairy feet swept from the green,
After a night of some quaint jubilee
Which every elf and fay had come to see:
When bright processions took their airy march
Beneath the curved moon's triumphal arch.

But might I now each passing moment give
To the coy muse, with me she would not live
In this dark city, nor would condescend
'Mid contradictions her delights to lend.
Should e'er the fine-eyed maid to me be kind,
Ah! surely it must be whene'er I find
Some flowery spot, sequester'd, wild, romantic,
That often must have seen a poet frantic;
Where oaks, that erst the Druid knew, are growing,
And flowers, the glory of one day, are blowing;
Where the dark-leav'd laburnum's drooping clusters
Reflect athwart the stream their yellow lustres,
And intertwined the cassia's arms unite,
With its own drooping buds, but very white.
Where on one side are covert branches hung,
'Mong which the nightingales have always sung
In leafy quiet; where to pry, aloof,
Atween the pillars of the sylvan roof,
Would be to find where violet beds were nestling,
And where the bee with cowslip bells was wrestling.
There must be too a ruin dark, and gloomy,
To say "joy not too much in all that's bloomy."

Yet this is vain--O Mathew lend thy aid
To find a place where I may greet the maid--
Where we may soft humanity put on,
And sit, and rhyme and think on Chatterton;
And that warm-hearted Shakspeare sent to meet him
Four laurell'd spirits, heaven-ward to intreat him.
With reverence would we speak of all the sages
Who have left streaks of light athwart their ages:
And thou shouldst moralize on Milton's blindness,
And mourn the fearful dearth of human kindness
To those who strove with the bright golden wing
Of genius, to flap away each sting
Thrown by the pitiless world. We next could tell
Of those who in the cause of freedom fell:
Of our own Alfred, of Helvetian Tell;
Of him whose name to ev'ry heart's a solace,
High-minded and unbending William Wallace.
While to the rugged north our musing turns
We well might drop a tear for him, and Burns.

Felton! without incitements such as these,
How vain for me the niggard Muse to tease:
For thee, she will thy every dwelling grace,
And make "a sun-shine in a shady place:"
For thou wast once a flowret blooming wild,
Close to the source, bright, pure, and undefil'd,
Whence gush the streams of song: in happy hour
Came chaste Diana from her shady bower,
Just as the sun was from the east uprising;
And, as for him some gift she was devising,
Beheld thee, pluck'd thee, cast thee in the stream
To meet her glorious brother's greeting beam.
I marvel much that thou hast never told
How, from a flower, into a fish of gold
Apollo chang'd thee; how thou next didst seem
A black-eyed swan upon the widening stream;
And when thou first didst in that mirror trace
The placid features of a human face:
That thou hast never told thy travels strange.
And all the wonders of the mazy range
O'er pebbly crystal, and o'er golden sands;
Kissing thy daily food from Naiad's pearly hands.


Full many a dreary hour have I past,
My brain bewilder'd, and my mind o'ercast
With heaviness; in seasons when I've thought
No spherey strains by me could e'er be caught
From the blue dome, though I to dimness gaze
On the far depth where sheeted lightning plays;
Or, on the wavy grass outstretch'd supinely,
Pry 'mong the stars, to strive to think divinely:
That I should never hear Apollo's song,
Though feathery clouds were floating all along
The purple west, and, two bright streaks between,
The golden lyre itself were dimly seen:
That the still murmur of the honey bee
Would never teach a rural song to me:
That the bright glance from beauty's eyelids slanting
Would never make a lay of mine enchanting,
Or warm my breast with ardour to unfold
Some tale of love and arms in time of old.

But there are times, when those that love the bay,
Fly from all sorrowing far, far away;
A sudden glow comes on them, nought they see
In water, earth, or air, but poesy.
It has been said, dear George, and true I hold it,
(For knightly Spenser to Libertas told it,)
That when a Poet is in such a trance,
In air he sees white coursers paw, and prance,
Bestridden of gay knights, in gay apparel,
Who at each other tilt in playful quarrel,
And what we, ignorantly, sheet-lightning call,
Is the swift opening of their wide portal,
When the bright warder blows his trumpet clear,
Whose tones reach nought on earth but Poet's ear.
When these enchanted portals open wide,
And through the light the horsemen swiftly glide,
The Poet's eye can reach those golden halls,
And view the glory of their festivals:
Their ladies fair, that in the distance seem
Fit for the silv'ring of a seraph's dream;
Their rich brimm'd goblets, that incessant run
Like the bright spots that move about the sun;
And, when upheld, the wine from each bright jar
Pours with the lustre of a falling star.
Yet further off, are dimly seen their bowers,
Of which, no mortal eye can reach the flowers;
And 'tis right just, for well Apollo knows
'Twould make the Poet quarrel with the rose.
All that's reveal'd from that far seat of blisses,
Is, the clear fountains' interchanging kisses.
As gracefully descending, light and thin,
Like silver streaks across a dolphin's fin,
When he upswimmeth from the coral caves.
And sports with half his tail above the waves.

These wonders strange be sees, and many more,
Whose head is pregnant with poetic lore.
Should he upon an evening ramble fare
With forehead to the soothing breezes bare,
Would he naught see but the dark, silent blue
With all its diamonds trembling through and through:
Or the coy moon, when in the waviness
Of whitest clouds she does her beauty dress,
And staidly paces higher up, and higher,
Like a sweet nun in holy-day attire?
Ah, yes! much more would start into his sight--
The revelries, and mysteries of night:
And should I ever see them, I will tell you
Such tales as needs must with amazement spell you.

These are the living pleasures of the bard:
But richer far posterity's award.
What does he murmur with his latest breath,
While his proud eye looks through the film of death?
"What though I leave this dull, and earthly mould,
Yet shall my spirit lofty converse hold
With after times.--The patriot shall feel
My stern alarum, and unsheath his steel;
Or, in the senate thunder out my numbers
To startle princes from their easy slumbers.
The sage will mingle with each moral theme
My happy thoughts sententious; he will teem
With lofty periods when my verses fire him,
And then I'll stoop from heaven to inspire him.
Lays have I left of such a dear delight
That maids will sing them on their bridal night.
Gay villagers, upon a morn of May
When they have tired their gentle limbs, with play,
And form'd a snowy circle on the grass,
And plac'd in midst of all that lovely lass
Who chosen is their queen,--with her fine head
Crowned with flowers purple, white, and red:
For there the lily, and the musk-rose, sighing,
Are emblems true of hapless lovers dying:
Between her breasts, that never yet felt trouble,
A bunch of violets full blown, and double,
Serenely sleep:--she from a casket takes
A little book,--and then a joy awakes
About each youthful heart,--with stifled cries,
And rubbing of white hands, and sparkling eyes:
For she's to read a tale of hopes, and fears;
One that I foster'd in my youthful years:
The pearls, that on each glist'ning circlet sleep,
Gush ever and anon with silent creep,
Lured by the innocent dimples. To sweet rest
Shall the dear babe, upon its mother's breast,
Be lull'd with songs of mine. Fair world, adieu!
Thy dales, and hills, are fading from my view:
Swiftly I mount, upon wide spreading pinions,
Far from the narrow bounds of thy dominions.
Full joy I feel, while thus I cleave the air,
That my soft verse will charm thy daughters fair,
And warm thy sons!" Ah, my dear friend and brother,
Could I, at once, my mad ambition smother,
For tasting joys like these, sure I should be
Happier, and dearer to society.
At times, 'tis true, I've felt relief from pain
When some bright thought has darted through my brain:
Through all that day I've felt a greater pleasure
Than if I'd brought to light a hidden treasure.
As to my sonnets, though none else should heed them,
I feel delighted, still, that you should read them.
Of late, too, I have had much calm enjoyment,
Stretch'd on the grass at my best lov'd employment
Of scribbling lines for you. These things I thought
While, in my face, the freshest breeze I caught.
E'en now I'm pillow'd on a bed of flowers
That crowns a lofty clift, which proudly towers
Above the ocean-waves. The stalks, and blades,
Chequer my tablet with their, quivering shades.
On one side is a field of drooping oats,
Through which the poppies show their scarlet coats
So pert and useless, that they bring to mind
The scarlet coats that pester human-kind.
And on the other side, outspread, is seen
Ocean's blue mantle streak'd with purple, and green.
Now 'tis I see a canvass'd ship, and now
Mark the bright silver curling round her prow.
I see the lark down-dropping to his nest.
And the broad winged sea-gull never at rest;
For when no more he spreads his feathers free,
His breast is dancing on the restless sea.
Now I direct my eyes into the west,
Which at this moment is in sunbeams drest:
Why westward turn? 'Twas but to say adieu!
'Twas but to kiss my hand, dear George, to you!



Oft have you seen a swan superbly frowning,
And with proud breast his own white shadow crowning;
He slants his neck beneath the waters bright
So silently, it seems a beam of light
Come from the galaxy: anon he sports,--
With outspread wings the Naiad Zephyr courts,
Or ruffles all the surface of the lake
In striving from its crystal face to take
Some diamond water drops, and them to treasure
In milky nest, and sip them off at leisure.
But not a moment can he there insure them,
Nor to such downy rest can he allure them;
For down they rush as though they would be free,
And drop like hours into eternity.
Just like that bird am I in loss of time,
Whene'er I venture on the stream of rhyme;
With shatter'd boat, oar snapt, and canvass rent,
I slowly sail, scarce knowing my intent;
Still scooping up the water with my fingers,
In which a trembling diamond never lingers.

By this, friend Charles, you may full plainly see
Why I have never penn'd a line to thee:
Because my thoughts were never free, and clear,
And little fit to please a classic ear;
Because my wine was of too poor a savour
For one whose palate gladdens in the flavour
Of sparkling Helicon:--small good it were
To take him to a desert rude, and bare.
Who had on Baiae's shore reclin'd at ease,
While Tasso's page was floating in a breeze
That gave soft music from Armida's bowers,
Mingled with fragrance from her rarest flowers:
Small good to one who had by Mulla's stream
Fondled the maidens with the breasts of cream;
Who had beheld Belphoebe in a brook,
And lovely Una in a leafy nook,
And Archimago leaning o'er his book:
Who had of all that's sweet tasted, and seen,
From silv'ry ripple, up to beauty's queen;
From the sequester'd haunts of gay Titania,
To the blue dwelling of divine Urania:
One, who, of late, had ta'en sweet forest walks
With him who elegantly chats, and talks--
The wrong'd Libert as,--who has told you stories
Of laurel chaplets, and Apollo's glories;
Of troops chivalrous prancing; through a city,
And tearful ladies made for love, and pity:
With many else which I have never known.
Thus have I thought; and days on days have flown
Slowly, or rapidly--unwilling still
For you to try my dull, unlearned quill.
Nor should I now, but that I've known you long;
That you first taught me all the sweets of song:
The grand, the sweet, the terse, the free, the fine;
What swell'd with pathos, and what right divine:
Spenserian vowels that elope with ease,
And float along like birds o'er summer seas;
Miltonian storms, and more, Miltonian tenderness;
Michael in arms, and more, meek Eve's fair slenderness.
Who read for me the sonnet swelling loudly
Up to its climax and then dying proudly?
Who found for me the grandeur of the ode,
Growing, like Atlas, stronger from its load?
Who let me taste that more than cordial dram,
The sharp, the rapier-pointed epigram?
Shew'd me that epic was of all the king,
Round, vast, and spanning all like Saturn's ring?
You too upheld the veil from Clio's beauty,
And pointed out the patriot's stern duty;
The might of Alfred, and the shaft of Tell;
The hand of Brutus, that so grandly fell
Upon a tyrant's head. Ah! had I never seen,
Or known your kindness, what might I have been?
What my enjoyments in my youthful years,
Bereft of all that now my life endears?
And can I e'er these benefits forget?
And can I e'er repay the friendly debt?
No, doubly no;--yet should these rhymings please,
I shall roll on the grass with two-fold ease:
For I have long time been my fancy feeding
With hopes that you would one day think the reading
Of my rough verses not an hour misspent;
Should it e'er be so, what a rich content!
Some weeks have pass'd since last I saw the spires
In lucent Thames reflected:--warm desires
To see the sun o'er peep the eastern dimness,
And morning shadows streaking into slimness
Across the lawny fields, and pebbly water;
To mark the time as they grow broad, and shorter;
To feel the air that plays about the hills,
And sips its freshness from the little rills;
To see high, golden corn wave in the light
When Cynthia smiles upon a summer's night,
And peers among the cloudlet's jet and white,
As though she were reclining in a bed
Of bean blossoms, in heaven freshly shed.
No sooner had I stepp'd into these pleasures
Than I began to think of rhymes and measures:
The air that floated by me seem'd to say
"Write! thou wilt never have a better day."
And so I did. When many lines I'd written,
Though with their grace I was not oversmitten,
Yet, as my hand was warm, I thought I'd better
Trust to my feelings, and write you a letter.
Such an attempt required an inspiration
Of a peculiar sort,--a consummation;--
Which, had I felt, these scribblings might have been
Verses from which the soul would never wean:
But many days have past since last my heart
Was warm'd luxuriously by divine Mozart;
By Arne delighted, or by Handel madden'd;
Or by the song of Erin pierc'd and sadden'd:
What time you were before the music sitting,
And the rich notes to each sensation fitting.
Since I have walk'd with you through shady lanes
That freshly terminate in open plains,
And revel'd in a chat that ceased not
When at night-fall among your books we got:
No, nor when supper came, nor after that,--
Nor when reluctantly I took my hat;
No, nor till cordially you shook my hand
Mid-way between our homes:--your accents bland
Still sounded in my ears, when I no more
Could hear your footsteps touch the grav'ly floor.
Sometimes I lost them, and then found again;
You chang'd the footpath for the grassy plain.
In those still moments I have wish'd you joys
That well you know to honour:--"Life's very toys
With him," said I, "will take a pleasant charm;
It cannot be that ought will work him harm."
These thoughts now come o'er me with all their might:--
Again I shake your hand,--friend Charles, good night.



Many the wonders I this day have seen:
  The sun, when first he kist away the tears
  That fill'd the eyes of morn;--the laurel'd peers
Who from the feathery gold of evening lean:--
The ocean with its vastness, its blue green,
  Its ships, its rocks, its caves, its hopes, its fears,--
  Its voice mysterious, which whoso hears
Must think on what will be, and what has been.
E'en now, dear George, while this for you I write,
  Cynthia is from her silken curtains peeping
So scantly, that it seems her bridal night,
  And she her half-discover'd revels keeping.
But what, without the social thought of thee,
Would be the wonders of the sky and sea?




Had I a man's fair form, then might my sighs
  Be echoed swiftly through that ivory shell,
  Thine ear, and find thy gentle heart; so well
Would passion arm me for the enterprize:
But ah! I am no knight whose foeman dies;
  No cuirass glistens on my bosom's swell;
  I am no happy shepherd of the dell
Whose lips have trembled with a maiden's eyes;
Yet must I dote upon thee,--call thee sweet.
  Sweeter by far than Hybla's honied roses
    When steep'd in dew rich to intoxication.
Ah! I will taste that dew, for me 'tis meet,
  And when the moon her pallid face discloses,
    I'll gather some by spells, and incantation.






What though, for showing truth to flatter'd state
  Kind Hunt was shut in prison, yet has he,
  In his immortal spirit, been as free
As the sky-searching lark, and as elate.
Minion of grandeur! think you he did wait?
  Think you he nought but prison walls did see,
  Till, so unwilling, thou unturn'dst the key?
Ah, no! far happier, nobler was his fate!
In Spenser's halls he strayed, and bowers fair,
  Culling enchanted flowers; and he flew
With daring Milton through the fields of air:
  To regions of his own his genius true
Took happy flights. Who shall his fame impair
  When thou art dead, and all thy wretched crew?






How many bards gild the lapses of time!
  A few of them have ever been the food
  Of my delighted fancy,--I could brood
Over their beauties, earthly, or sublime:
And often, when I sit me down to rhyme,
  These will in throngs before my mind intrude:
  But no confusion, no disturbance rude
Do they occasion; 'tis a pleasing chime.
So the unnumber'd sounds that evening store;
  The songs of birds--the whisp'ring of the leaves--
The voice of waters--the great bell that heaves
  With solemn sound,--and thousand others more,
That distance of recognizance bereaves,
  Make pleasing music, and not wild uproar.






As late I rambled in the happy fields,
  What time the sky-lark shakes the tremulous dew
  From his lush clover covert;--when anew
Adventurous knights take up their dinted shields:
I saw the sweetest flower wild nature yields,
  A fresh-blown musk-rose; 'twas the first that threw
  Its sweets upon the summer: graceful it grew
As is the wand that queen Titania wields.
And, as I feasted on its fragrancy,
  I thought the garden-rose it far excell'd:
But when, O Wells! thy roses came to me
  My sense with their deliciousness was spell'd:
Soft voices had they, that with tender plea
  Whisper'd of peace, and truth, and friendliness unquell'd.






Nymph of the downward smile, and sidelong glance,
  In what diviner moments of the day
  Art thou most lovely? When gone far astray
Into the labyrinths of sweet utterance?
Or when serenely wand'ring in a trance
  Of sober thought? Or when starting away,
  With careless robe, to meet the morning ray,
Thou spar'st the flowers in thy mazy dance?
Haply 'tis when thy ruby lips part sweetly,
  And so remain, because thou listenest:
But thou to please wert nurtured so completely
  That I can never tell what mood is best.
I shall as soon pronounce which grace more neatly
  Trips it before Apollo than the rest.






O Solitude! if I must with thee dwell,
  Let it not be among the jumbled heap
  Of murky buildings; climb with me the steep,--
Nature's observatory--whence the dell,
Its flowery slopes, its river's crystal swell,
  May seem a span; let me thy vigils keep
  'Mongst boughs pavillion'd, where the deer's swift leap
Startles the wild bee from the fox-glove bell.
But though I'll gladly trace these scenes with thee,
  Yet the sweet converse of an innocent mind,
Whose words are images of thoughts refin'd,
  Is my soul's pleasure; and it sure must be
Almost the highest bliss of human-kind,
  When to thy haunts two kindred spirits flee.






Small, busy flames play through the fresh laid coals,
  And their faint cracklings o'er our silence creep
  Like whispers of the household gods that keep
A gentle empire o'er fraternal souls.
And while, for rhymes, I search around the poles,
  Your eyes are fix'd, as in poetic sleep,
  Upon the lore so voluble and deep,
That aye at fall of night our care condoles.
This is your birth-day Tom, and I rejoice
  That thus it passes smoothly, quietly.
Many such eves of gently whisp'ring noise
  May we together pass, and calmly try
What are this world's true joys,--ere the great voice,
  From its fair face, shall bid our spirits fly.



Keen, fitful gusts are whisp'ring here and there
  Among the bushes half leafless, and dry;
  The stars look very cold about the sky,
And I have many miles on foot to fare.
Yet feel I little of the cool bleak air,
  Or of the dead leaves rustling drearily,
  Or of those silver lamps that burn on high,
Or of the distance from home's pleasant lair:
For I am brimfull of the friendliness
  That in a little cottage I have found;
Of fair-hair'd Milton's eloquent distress,
  And all his love for gentle Lycid drown'd;
Of lovely Laura in her light green dress,
  And faithful Petrarch gloriously crown'd.






To one who has been long in city pent,
  'Tis very sweet to look into the fair
  And open face of heaven,--to breathe a prayer
Full in the smile of the blue firmament.
Who is more happy, when, with hearts content,
  Fatigued he sinks into some pleasant lair
  Of wavy grass, and reads a debonair
And gentle tale of love and languishment?
Returning home at evening, with an ear
  Catching the notes of Philomel,--an eye
Watching the sailing cloudlet's bright career,
  He mourns that day so soon has glided by:
E'en like the passage of an angel's tear
  That falls through the clear ether silently.






Much have I traveled in the realms of gold,
  And many goodly states and kingdoms seen;
  Round many western islands have I been
Which bards in fealty to Apollo hold.
Oft of one wide expanse had I been told
  That deep-brow'd Homer ruled as his demesne;
  Yet did I never breathe its pure serene
Till I heard Chapman speak out loud and bold:
Then felt I like some watcher of the skies
  When a new planet swims into his ken;
Or like stout Cortez when with eagle eyes
  He star'd at the Pacific--and all his men
Look'd at each other with a wild surmise--
  Silent, upon a peak in Darien.






Give me a golden pen, and let me lean
  On heap'd up flowers, in regions clear, and far;
  Bring me a tablet whiter than a star,
Or hand of hymning angel, when 'tis seen
The silver strings of heavenly harp atween:
  And let there glide by many a pearly car,
  Pink robes, and wavy hair, and diamond jar,
And half discovered wings, and glances keen.
The while let music wander round my ears.
  And as it reaches each delicious ending,
    Let me write down a line of glorious tone,
And full of many wonders of the spheres:
  For what a height my spirit is contending!
    'Tis not content so soon to be alone.






Highmindedness, a jealousy for good,
  A loving-kindness for the great man's fame,
  Dwells here and there with people of no name,
In noisome alley, and in pathless wood:
And where we think the truth least understood,
  Oft may be found a "singleness of aim,"
  That ought to frighten into hooded shame
A money mong'ring, pitiable brood.
How glorious this affection for the cause
  Of stedfast genius, toiling gallantly!
What when a stout unbending champion awes
  Envy, and Malice to their native sty?
Unnumber'd souls breathe out a still applause,
  Proud to behold him in his country's eye.






Great spirits now on earth are sojourning;
  He of the cloud, the cataract, the lake,
  Who on Helvellyn's summit, wide awake,
Catches his freshness from Archangel's wing:
He of the rose, the violet, the spring.
  The social smile, the chain for Freedom's sake:
  And lo!--whose stedfastness would never take
A meaner sound than Raphael's whispering.
And other spirits there are standing apart
  Upon the forehead of the age to come;
These, these will give the world another heart,
  And other pulses. Hear ye not the hum
Of mighty workings?
  Listen awhile ye nations, and be dumb.






The poetry of earth is never dead:
  When all the birds are faint with the hot sun,
  And hide in cooling trees, a voice will run
From hedge to hedge about the new-mown mead;
That is the Grasshopper's--he takes the lead
  In summer luxury,--he has never done
  With his delights; for when tired out with fun
He rests at ease beneath some pleasant weed.
The poetry of earth is ceasing never:
  On a lone winter evening, when the frost
    Has wrought a silence, from the stove there shrills
The Cricket's song, in warmth increasing ever,
  And seems to one in drowsiness half lost,
    The Grasshopper's among some grassy hills.



Good Kosciusko, thy great name alone
  Is a full harvest whence to reap high feeling;
  It comes upon us like the glorious pealing
Of the wide spheres--an everlasting tone.
And now it tells me, that in worlds unknown,
  The names of heroes, burst from clouds concealing,
  And changed to harmonies, for ever stealing
Through cloudless blue, and round each silver throne.
It tells me too, that on a happy day,
  When some good spirit walks upon the earth,
  Thy name with Alfred's, and the great of yore
Gently commingling, gives tremendous birth
To a loud hymn, that sounds far, far away
  To where the great God lives for evermore.






Happy is England! I could be content
  To see no other verdure than its own;
  To feel no other breezes than are blown
Through its tall woods with high romances blent:
Yet do I sometimes feel a languishment
  For skies Italian, and an inward groan
  To sit upon an Alp as on a throne,
And half forget what world or worldling meant.
Happy is England, sweet her artless daughters;
  Enough their simple loveliness for me,
    Enough their whitest arms in silence clinging:
  Yet do I often warmly burn to see
    Beauties of deeper glance, and hear their singing,
And float with them about the summer waters.






"As I lay in my bed slepe full unmete
Was unto me, but why that I ne might
Rest I ne wist, for there n'as erthly wight
[As I suppose] had more of hertis ese
Than I, for I n'ad sicknesse nor disese."



What is more gentle than a wind in summer?
What is more soothing than the pretty hummer
That stays one moment in an open flower,
And buzzes cheerily from bower to bower?
What is more tranquil than a musk-rose blowing
In a green island, far from all men's knowing?
More healthful than the leafiness of dales?
More secret than a nest of nightingales?
More serene than Cordelia's countenance?
More full of visions than a high romance?
What, but thee Sleep? Soft closer of our eyes!
Low murmurer of tender lullabies!
Light hoverer around our happy pillows!
Wreather of poppy buds, and weeping willows!
Silent entangler of a beauty's tresses!
Most happy listener! when the morning blesses
Thee for enlivening all the cheerful eyes
That glance so brightly at the new sun-rise.

But what is higher beyond thought than thee?
Fresher than berries of a mountain tree?
More strange, more beautiful, more smooth, more regal,
Than wings of swans, than doves, than dim-seen eagle?
What is it? And to what shall I compare it?
It has a glory, and nought else can share it:
The thought thereof is awful, sweet, and holy,
Chacing away all worldliness and folly;
Coming sometimes like fearful claps of thunder,
Or the low rumblings earth's regions under;
And sometimes like a gentle whispering
Of all the secrets of some wond'rous thing
That breathes about us in the vacant air;
So that we look around with prying stare,
Perhaps to see shapes of light, aerial lymning,
And catch soft floatings from a faint-heard hymning;
To see the laurel wreath, on high suspended,
That is to crown our name when life is ended.
Sometimes it gives a glory to the voice,
And from the heart up-springs, rejoice! rejoice!
Sounds which will reach the Framer of all things,
And die away in ardent mutterings.

No one who once the glorious sun has seen,
And all the clouds, and felt his bosom clean
For his great Maker's presence, but must know
What 'tis I mean, and feel his being glow:
Therefore no insult will I give his spirit,
By telling what he sees from native merit.

O Poesy! for thee I hold my pen
That am not yet a glorious denizen
Of thy wide heaven--Should I rather kneel
Upon some mountain-top until I feel
A glowing splendour round about me hung,
And echo back the voice of thine own tongue?
O Poesy! for thee I grasp my pen
That am not yet a glorious denizen
Of thy wide heaven; yet, to my ardent prayer,
Yield from thy sanctuary some clear air,
Smoothed for intoxication by the breath
Of flowering bays, that I may die a death
Of luxury, and my young spirit follow
The morning sun-beams to the great Apollo
Like a fresh sacrifice; or, if I can bear
The o'erwhelming sweets, 'twill bring to me the fair
Visions of all places: a bowery nook
Will be elysium--an eternal book
Whence I may copy many a lovely saying
About the leaves, and flowers--about the playing
Of nymphs in woods, and fountains; and the shade
Keeping a silence round a sleeping maid;
And many a verse from so strange influence
That we must ever wonder how, and whence
It came. Also imaginings will hover
Round my fire-side, and haply there discover
Vistas of solemn beauty, where I'd wander
In happy silence, like the clear meander
Through its lone vales; and where I found a spot
Of awfuller shade, or an enchanted grot,
Or a green hill o'erspread with chequered dress
Of flowers, and fearful from its loveliness,
Write on my tablets all that was permitted,
All that was for our human senses fitted.
Then the events of this wide world I'd seize
Like a strong giant, and my spirit teaze
Till at its shoulders it should proudly see
Wings to find out an immortality.

Stop and consider! life is but a day;
A fragile dew-drop on its perilous way
From a tree's summit; a poor Indian's sleep
While his boat hastens to the monstrous steep
Of Montmorenci. Why so sad a moan?
Life is the rose's hope while yet unblown;
The reading of an ever-changing tale;
The light uplifting of a maiden's veil;
A pigeon tumbling in clear summer air;
A laughing school-boy, without grief or care,
Riding the springy branches of an elm.

O for ten years, that I may overwhelm
Myself in poesy; so I may do the deed
That my own soul has to itself decreed.
Then will I pass the countries that I see
In long perspective, and continually
Taste their pure fountains. First the realm I'll pass
Of Flora, and old Pan: sleep in the grass,
Feed upon apples red, and strawberries,
And choose each pleasure that my fancy sees;
Catch the white-handed nymphs in shady places,
To woo sweet kisses from averted faces,--
Play with their fingers, touch their shoulders white
Into a pretty shrinking with a bite
As hard as lips can make it: till agreed,
A lovely tale of human life we'll read.
And one will teach a tame dove how it best
May fan the cool air gently o'er my rest;
Another, bending o'er her nimble tread,
Will set a green robe floating round her head,
And still will dance with ever varied case,
Smiling upon the flowers and the trees:
Another will entice me on, and on
Through almond blossoms and rich cinnamon;
Till in the bosom of a leafy world
We rest in silence, like two gems upcurl'd
In the recesses of a pearly shell.

And can I ever bid these joys farewell?
Yes, I must pass them for a nobler life,
Where I may find the agonies, the strife
Of human hearts: for lo! I see afar,
O'er sailing the blue cragginess, a car
And steeds with streamy manes--the charioteer
Looks out upon the winds with glorious fear:
And now the numerous tramplings quiver lightly
Along a huge cloud's ridge; and now with sprightly
Wheel downward come they into fresher skies,
Tipt round with silver from the sun's bright eyes.
Still downward with capacious whirl they glide,
And now I see them on a green-hill's side
In breezy rest among the nodding stalks.
The charioteer with wond'rous gesture talks
To the trees and mountains; and there soon appear
Shapes of delight, of mystery, and fear,
Passing along before a dusky space
Made by some mighty oaks: as they would chase
Some ever-fleeting music on they sweep.
Lo! how they murmur, laugh, and smile, and weep:
Some with upholden hand and mouth severe;
Some with their faces muffled to the ear
Between their arms; some, clear in youthful bloom,
Go glad and smilingly, athwart the gloom;
Some looking back, and some with upward gaze;
Yes, thousands in a thousand different ways
Flit onward--now a lovely wreath of girls
Dancing their sleek hair into tangled curls;
And now broad wings. Most awfully intent
The driver, of those steeds is forward bent,
And seems to listen: O that I might know
All that he writes with such a hurrying glow.

The visions all are fled--the car is fled
Into the light of heaven, and in their stead
A sense of real things comes doubly strong,
And, like a muddy stream, would bear along
My soul to nothingness: but I will strive
Against all doublings, and will keep alive
The thought of that same chariot, and the strange
Journey it went.

            Is there so small a range
In the present strength of manhood, that the high
Imagination cannot freely fly
As she was wont of old? prepare her steeds,
Paw up against the light, and do strange deeds
Upon the clouds? Has she not shewn us all?
From the clear space of ether, to the small
Breath of new buds unfolding? From the meaning
Of Jove's large eye-brow, to the tender greening
Of April meadows? Here her altar shone,
E'en in this isle; and who could paragon
The fervid choir that lifted up a noise
Of harmony, to where it aye will poise
Its mighty self of convoluting sound,
Huge as a planet, and like that roll round,
Eternally around a dizzy void?
Ay, in those days the Muses were nigh cloy'd
With honors; nor had any other care
Than to sing out and sooth their wavy hair.

Could all this be forgotten? Yes, a schism
Nurtured by foppery and barbarism,
Made great Apollo blush for this his land.
Men were thought wise who could not understand
His glories: with a puling infant's force
They sway'd about upon a rocking horse,
And thought it Pegasus. Ah dismal soul'd!
The winds of heaven blew, the ocean roll'd
Its gathering waves--ye felt it not. The blue
Bared its eternal bosom, and the dew
Of summer nights collected still to make
The morning precious: beauty was awake!
Why were ye not awake? But ye were dead
To things ye knew not of,--were closely wed
To musty laws lined out with wretched rule
And compass vile: so that ye taught a school
Of dolts to smooth, inlay, and clip, and fit,
Till, like the certain wands of Jacob's wit,
Their verses tallied. Easy was the task:
A thousand handicraftsmen wore the mask
Of Poesy. Ill-fated, impious race!
That blasphemed the bright Lyrist to his face,
And did not know it,--no, they went about,
Holding a poor, decrepid standard out
Mark'd with most flimsy mottos, and in large
The name of one Boileau!

                              O ye whose charge
It is to hover round our pleasant hills!
Whose congregated majesty so fills
My boundly reverence, that I cannot trace
Your hallowed names, in this unholy place,
So near those common folk; did not their shames
Affright you? Did our old lamenting Thames
Delight you? Did ye never cluster round
Delicious Avon, with a mournful sound,
And weep? Or did ye wholly bid adieu
To regions where no more the laurel grew?
Or did ye stay to give a welcoming
To some lone spirits who could proudly sing
Their youth away, and die? 'Twas even so:
But let me think away those times of woe:
Now 'tis a fairer season; ye have breathed
Rich benedictions o'er us; ye have wreathed
Fresh garlands: for sweet music has been heard
In many places;--some has been upstirr'd
From out its crystal dwelling in a lake,
By a swan's ebon bill; from a thick brake,
Nested and quiet in a valley mild,
Bubbles a pipe; fine sounds are floating wild
About the earth: happy are ye and glad.

These things are doubtless: yet in truth we've had
Strange thunders from the potency of song;
Mingled indeed with what is sweet and strong,
From majesty: but in clear truth the themes
Are ugly clubs, the Poets Polyphemes
Disturbing the grand sea. A drainless shower
Of light is poesy; 'tis the supreme of power;
'Tis might half slumb'ring on its own right arm.
The very archings of her eye-lids charm
A thousand willing agents to obey,
And still she governs with the mildest sway:
But strength alone though of the Muses born
Is like a fallen angel: trees uptorn,
Darkness, and worms, and shrouds, and sepulchres
Delight it; for it feeds upon the burrs,
And thorns of life; forgetting the great end
Of poesy, that it should be a friend
To sooth the cares, and lift the thoughts of man.

  Yet I rejoice: a myrtle fairer than
E'er grew in Paphos, from the bitter weeds
Lifts its sweet head into the air, and feeds
A silent space with ever sprouting green.
All tenderest birds there find a pleasant screen,
Creep through the shade with jaunty fluttering,
Nibble the little cupped flowers and sing.
Then let us clear away the choaking thorns
From round its gentle stem; let the young fawns,
Yeaned in after times, when we are flown,
Find a fresh sward beneath it, overgrown
With simple flowers: let there nothing be
More boisterous than a lover's bended knee;
Nought more ungentle than the placid look
Of one who leans upon a closed book;
Nought more untranquil than the grassy slopes
Between two hills. All hail delightful hopes!
As she was wont, th' imagination
Into most lovely labyrinths will be gone,
And they shall be accounted poet kings
Who simply tell the most heart-easing things.
O may these joys be ripe before I die.

Will not some say that I presumptuously
Have spoken? that from hastening disgrace
'Twere better far to hide my foolish face?
That whining boyhood should with reverence bow
Ere the dread thunderbolt could reach? How!
If I do hide myself, it sure shall be
In the very fane, the light of Poesy:
If I do fall, at least I will be laid
Beneath the silence of a poplar shade;
And over me the grass shall be smooth shaven;
And there shall be a kind memorial graven.
But oft' Despondence! miserable bane!
They should not know thee, who athirst to gain
A noble end, are thirsty every hour.
What though I am not wealthy in the dower
Of spanning wisdom; though I do not know
The shiftings of the mighty winds, that blow
Hither and thither all the changing thoughts
Of man: though no great minist'ring reason sorts
Out the dark mysteries of human souls
To clear conceiving: yet there ever rolls
A vast idea before me, and I glean
Therefrom my liberty; thence too I've seen
The end and aim of Poesy. 'Tis clear
As any thing most true; as that the year
Is made of the four seasons--manifest
As a large cross, some old cathedral's crest,
Lifted to the white clouds. Therefore should I
Be but the essence of deformity,
A coward, did my very eye-lids wink
At speaking out what I have dared to think.
Ah! rather let me like a madman run
Over some precipice; let the hot sun
Melt my Dedalian wings, and drive me down
Convuls'd and headlong! Stay! an inward frown
Of conscience bids me be more calm awhile.
An ocean dim, sprinkled with many an isle,
Spreads awfully before me. How much toil!
How many days! what desperate turmoil!
Ere I can have explored its widenesses.
Ah, what a task! upon my bended knees,
I could unsay those--no, impossible!
Impossible!

                 For sweet relief I'll dwell
On humbler thoughts, and let this strange assay
Begun in gentleness die so away.
E'en now all tumult from my bosom fades:
I turn full hearted to the friendly aids
That smooth the path of honour; brotherhood,
And friendliness the nurse of mutual good.
The hearty grasp that sends a pleasant sonnet
Into the brain ere one can think upon it;
The silence when some rhymes are coming out;
And when they're come, the very pleasant rout:
The message certain to be done to-morrow.
'Tis perhaps as well that it should be to borrow
Some precious book from out its snug retreat,
To cluster round it when we next shall meet.
Scarce can I scribble on; for lovely airs
Are fluttering round the room like doves in pairs;
Many delights of that glad day recalling,
When first my senses caught their tender falling.
And with these airs come forms of elegance
Stooping their shoulders o'er a horse's prance,
Careless, and grand--fingers soft and round
Parting luxuriant curls;--and the swift bound
Of Bacchus from his chariot, when his eye
Made Ariadne's cheek look blushingly.
Thus I remember all the pleasant flow
Of words at opening a portfolio.

Things such as these are ever harbingers
To trains of peaceful images: the stirs
Of a swan's neck unseen among the rushes:
A linnet starting all about the bushes:
A butterfly, with golden wings broad parted,
Nestling a rose, convuls'd as though it smarted
With over pleasure--many, many more,
Might I indulge at large in all my store
Of luxuries: yet I must not forget
Sleep, quiet with his poppy coronet:
For what there may be worthy in these rhymes
I partly owe to him: and thus, the chimes
Of friendly voices had just given place
To as sweet a silence, when I 'gan retrace
The pleasant day, upon a couch at ease.
It was a poet's house who keeps the keys
Of pleasure's temple. Round about were hung
The glorious features of the bards who sung
In other ages--cold and sacred busts
Smiled at each other. Happy he who trusts
To clear Futurity his darling fame!
Then there were fauns and satyrs taking aim
At swelling apples with a frisky leap
And reaching fingers, 'mid a luscious heap
Of vine leaves. Then there rose to view a fane
Of liny marble, and thereto a train
Of nymphs approaching fairly o'er the sward:
One, loveliest, holding her white band toward
The dazzling sun-rise: two sisters sweet
Bending their graceful figures till they meet
Over the trippings of a little child:
And some are hearing, eagerly, the wild
Thrilling liquidity of dewy piping.
See, in another picture, nymphs are wiping
Cherishingly Diana's timorous limbs;--
A fold of lawny mantle dabbling swims
At the bath's edge, and keeps a gentle motion
With the subsiding crystal: as when ocean
Heaves calmly its broad swelling smoothiness o'er
Its rocky marge, and balances once more
The patient weeds; that now unshent by foam
Feel all about their undulating home.

Sappho's meek head was there half smiling down
At nothing; just as though the earnest frown
Of over thinking had that moment gone
From off her brow, and left her all alone.

Great Alfred's too, with anxious, pitying eyes,
As if he always listened to the sighs
Of the goaded world; and Kosciusko's worn
By horrid suffrance--mightily forlorn.

Petrarch, outstepping from the shady green,
Starts at the sight of Laura; nor can wean
His eyes from her sweet face. Most happy they!
For over them was seen a free display
Of out-spread wings, and from between them shone
The face of Poesy: from off her throne
She overlook'd things that I scarce could tell.
The very sense of where I was might well
Keep Sleep aloof: but more than that there came
Thought after thought to nourish up the flame
Within my breast; so that the morning light
Surprised me even from a sleepless night;
And up I rose refresh'd, and glad, and gay,
Resolving to begin that very day
These lines; and howsoever they be done,
I leave them as a father does his son.
